<HTML>I

1.1

‘YOU too will marry a boy I choose,’ said Mrs Rupa Mehra
firmly to her younger daughter.

Lata avoided the maternal imperative by looking around the
great lamp-lit garden of Prem Nivas. The weddingguests were
gathered on the lawn. ‘Hmm,’ she said. This annoyed her
mother further.

‘I know what your hmms mean, young lady, and I can tell you
I will not stand for hmms in this matter. I do know what is
best. I am doing it all for you. Do you think it is easy for me,
trying to arrange things for all four of my children without His
help ?’ Her nose began to redden at the thought of her
husband, who would, she felt certain, be partaking of their
present joy from somewhere benevolently above. Mrs Rupa
Mehra believed, of course, in reincarnation, but at moments of
exceptional sentiment, she imagined that the late Raghubir
Mehra still inhabited the form in which she had known him
when he was alive : the robust, cheerful form of his early
forties before overwork had brought about his heart attack at
the height of the Second World War. Eight years ago, eight
years, thought Mrs Rupa Mehra miserably.

‘Now, now, Ma, you can’t cry on Savita’s wedding day,’ said
Lata, putting her arm gently but not very concernedly around
her mother’s shoulder.

‘If He had been here, I could have worn the tissue-patola sari I
wore for my own wedding,’ sighed Mrs Rupa Mehra. ‘But it is
too rich for a widow to wear.’

‘Ma!’ said Lata, a little exasperated at the emotional capital
her mother insisted on making out of every possible
circumstance. ‘People are looking at you. They want to
congratulate you, and they’ll think it very odd if they see you
crying in this way.’

Several guests were indeed doing namasté to Mrs Rupa Mehra
and smiling at her ; the cream of Brahmpur society, she was
pleased to note.

‘Let them see me!’ said Mrs Rupa Mehra defiantly, dabbing at
her eyes hastily with a handkerchief perfumedwith 4711 eaude-Cologne, ‘They will only think it is because of my
happiness at Savita’s wedding. Everything I do is for you, and
no one appreciates me. I have chosen such a good boy for
Savita, and all everyone does is complain.’

Lata reflected that of the four brothers and sisters, the only one
who hadn’t complained of the match had been the sweettempered, fair-complexioned, beautiful Savita herself.

‘He is a little thin, Ma,’ said Lata a bit thoughtlessly. This was
putting it mildly. Pran Kapoor, soon to be her brother-in-law,
was lank, dark, gangly, and asthmatic.

‘Thin ? What is thin ? Everyone is trying to become thin these
days. Even I have had to fast the whole day and it is not good
for my diabetes. And if Savita is not complaining, everyone
should be happy with him. Arun and Varun are always
complaining: why didn’t they choose a boy for their sister then
? Pran is a good, decent, cultured khatri boy.’

There was no denying that Pran, at thirty, was a good boy, a
decent boy, and belonged to the right caste. And, indeed, Lata
did like Pran. Oddly enough, she knew him better than her
sister did - or, at least, had seen him for longer than her sister
had. Lata was studying English at Brahmpur University, and
Pran Kapoor was a popular lecturer there. Lata had attended
his class on the Elizabethans, while Savita, the bride, had met
him for only an hour, and that too in her mother’s company.

‘And Savita will fatten him up,’ added Mrs Rupa Mehra.
‘Why are you trying to annoy me when I am so happy? And
Pran and Savita will be happy, you will see. They will be
happy,’ she continued emphatically. ‘Thank you, thank you,’
she now beamed at those who were coming up to greet her. ‘It
is so wonderful - the boy of my dreams, and such a good
family. The Minister Sahib has been very kind to us. And
Savita is so happy. Please eat something, please eat: they have
made such delicious gulab-jamuns, but owing to my diabetes I
cannot eat them even after the ceremonies. I am not even
allowed gajak, which is sodifficult to resist in winter. But
please eat, please eat. I must go in to check what is happening:
the time that the pandits have given is coming up, and there is
no sign of either bride or groom!’ She looked at Lata,
frowning. Her younger daughter was going to prove more
difficult than her elder, she decided.

‘Don’t forget what I told you,’ she said in an admonitory
voice.

‘Hmm,’ said Lata. ‘Ma, your handkerchief’s sticking out of
your blouse.’

‘Oh!’ said Mrs Rupa Mehra, worriedly tucking it in. ‘And tell
Arun to please take his duties seriously. He is just standing
there in a corner talking to that Meenakshi and his silly friend

from Calcutta. He should see that everyone is drinking and
eating properly and having a gala time.’

‘That Meenakshi’ was Arun’s glamorous wife and her own
disrespectful daughter-in-law. In four years of marriage
Meenakshi’s only worthwhile act, in Mrs Rupa Mehra’s eyes,
had been to give birth to her beloved granddaughter, Aparna,
who even now had found her way to her grandmother’s brown
silk sari and was tugging it for attention. Mrs Rupa Mehra was
delighted. She gave her a kiss and told her :

‘Aparna, you must stay with your Mummy or with Lata Bua,
otherwise you will get lost. And then where would we be?’

‘Can’t I come with you ?’ asked Aparna, who, at three,
naturally had views and preferences of her own.

‘Sweetheart, I wish you could,’ said Mrs Rupa Mehra, ‘but I
have to make sure that your Savita Bua is ready to be married.
She is so late already.’ And Mrs Rupa Mehra looked once
again at the little gold watch that had been her husband’s first
gift to her and which had not missed a beat for two-and-a-half
decades.

‘I want to see Savita Bua!’ said Aparna, holding her ground.

Mrs Rupa Mehra looked a little harassed and nodded vaguely
at Aparna.

Lata picked Aparna up. ‘When Savita Bua comes out,we’ll go
over there together, shall we, and I’ll hold you up like this, and

we’ll both get a good view. Meanwhile, should we go and see
if we can get some ice-cream ? iffëél like some too.’

Aparna approved of this, as of most of Lata’s suggestions. It
was never too cold for ice-cream. They walked towards the
buffet table together, three-year-old and nineteen-year-old
hand in hand. A few rose-petals wafted down on them from
somewhere.

‘What is good enough for your sister is good enough for you,’
said Mrs Rupa Mehra to Lata as a parting shot.

‘We can’t both marry Pran,’ said Lata, laughing.

1.2

THE other chief host of the wedding was the groom’s father,
Mr Mahesh Kapoor, who was the Minister of Revenue of the
state of Purva Pradesh. It was in fact in his large, C-shaped,
cream-coloured, two-storey family house, Prem Nivas,
situated in the quietest, greenest residential area of the ancient,
and - for the most part - over-populated city of Brahmpur, that
the wedding was taking place.

This was so unusual that the whole of Brahmpur had been
buzzing about it for days. Mrs Rupa Mehra’s father, who was
supposed to be the host, had taken sudden umbrage a fortnight
before the wedding, had locked up his house, and had
disappeared. Mrs Rupa Mehra had been distraught. The
Minister Sahib had stepped in (‘Your honour is our honour’),
and had insisted on putting on the wedding himself. As for the
ensuing gossip, he ignored it.

There was no question of Mrs Rupa Mehra helping to pay for
the wedding. The Minister Sahib would not hear of it. Nor had
he at any time asked for any dowry. He was an old friend and
bridge partner of Mrs Rupa Mehra’s father and he had liked
what he had seen of her daughter Savita (though he could
never remember the girl’s name). He was sympathetic to
economic hardship, for he too had tasted it. During the several
years he had spent in British

6jails during the struggle for Independence, there had been no
one to run his farm or his cloth business. As a result very little
income had come in, and his wife and family had struggled
along with great difficulty.

Those unhappy times, however, were only a memory for the
able, impatient, and powerful Minister. It was the early winter
of 1950, and India had been free for over three years. But
freedom for the country did not mean freedom for his younger
son, Maan, who even now was being told by his father :

‘What is good enough for your brother is good enough for
you.’

‘Yes, Baoji,’ said Maan, smiling.

Mr Mahesh Kapoor frowned. His younger son, while
succeeding to his own habit of fine dress, had not succeeded to
his obsession with hard work. Nor did he appear to have any
ambition to speak of.

‘It is no use being a good-looking young wastrel forever,’ said
his father. ‘And marriage will force you to settle down and

take things seriously. I have written to the Banaras people, and
I expect a favourable answer any day.’

Marriage was the last thing on Maan’s mind; he had caught a
friend’s eye in the crowd and was waving at him. Hundreds of
small coloured lights strung through the hedge came on all at
once, and the silk saris and jewellery of the women glimmered
and glinted even more brightly. The high, reedy shehnai music
burst into a pattern of speed and brilliance. Maan was
entranced. He noticed Lata making her way through the
guests. Quite an attractive girl, Savita’s sister, he thought. Not
very tall and not very fair, but attractive, with an oval face, a
shy light in her dark eyes and an affectionate manner towards
the child she was leading by the hand.

‘Yes, Baoji,’ said Maan obediently.

‘What did I say ?’ demanded his father.

‘About marriage, Baoji,’ said Maan.

‘What about marriage ?’

Maan was nonplussed.

‘Don’t you listen ?’ demanded Mahesh Kapoor, wanting

7to twist Maan’s ear. ‘You are as bad as the clerks in the
Revenue Department. You were not paying attention, you were
waving at Firoz.’ C V

Maan looked a little shamefaced. He knew what his father
thought of him. But he had been enjoying himself until a
couple of minutes ago, and it was just like Baoji to come and
puncture his light spirits.

‘So that’s all fixed up,’ continued his father. ‘Don’t tell me
later that I didn’t warn you. And don’t get that weak-*» willed
woman, your mother, to change her mind and come telling me
that you aren’t yet ready to take on the responsibilities of a
man.’

‘No, Baoji,’ said Maan, getting the drift of things and I
looking a trifle glum. j

‘We chose well for Veena, we have chosen well for Pran, ; and
you are not to complain about our choice of a bride for you.’

Maan said nothing. He was wondering how to repair the
puncture. He had a bottle of Scotch upstairs in his room, and
perhaps he and Firoz could escape for a few minutes before
the ceremony - or even during it - for refreshment.

His father paused to smile brusquely at a few wellwishers,
then turned to Maan again.

‘I don’t want to have to waste any more time with you today.
God knows I have enough to do as it is. What ha happened to
Pran and that girl, what’s her name? It’s getting late. They
were supposed to come out from opposite j ends of the house
and meet here for the jaymala five i minutes ago.’ f

‘Savita,’ prompted Maan.

‘Yes, yes,’ said his father impatiently. ‘Savita. Your
superstitious mother will start panicking if they miss the
correct configuration of the stars. Go and calm her down. | Go
! Do some good.

And Mahesh Kapoor went back to his own duties as a host. He
frowned impatiently at one of the officiating priests, who
smiled weakly back. He narrowly avoided being butted in the
stomach and knocked over by three

children, offspring of his rural relatives, who were careering
joyfully around the garden as if it were a field of stubble. And
he greeted, before he had walked ten steps, a professor of
literature (who could be useful for Pran’s career two influential
members of the state legislature from the Congress Party (who
might well agree to back him in his perennial power-struggle
with the Home Minister) ; a judge, the very last Englishman to
remain on the bench of the Brahmpur High Court after
Independence ; and his old friend the Nawab Sahib of Baitar,
one of the largest landowners in the state.

1.3

LATA, who had heard a part of Maan’s conversation with his
father, could not help smiling to herself as she walked past.

‘I see you’re enjoying yourself,’ said Maan to her in English.

His conversation with his father had been in Hindi, hers with
her mother in English. Maan spoke both well.

Lata was struck shy, as she sometimes was with strangers,
especially those who smiled as boldly as Maan. Let him do the
smiling for both of us, she thought.

‘Yes,’ she said simply, her eyes resting on his face for just a
second. Aparna tugged at her hand.

‘Well, now, we’re almost family,’ said Maan, perhaps sensing
her awkwardness. ‘A few minutes more, and the ceremonies
will start.’

‘Yes,’ agreed Lata, looking up at him again more confidently.
She paused and frowned. ‘My mother’s concerned that they
won’t start on time.’

‘So is my father,’ said Maan.

Lata began smiling again, but when Maan asked her why she
shook her head.

‘Well,’ said Maan, flicking a rose-petal off his beautiful tight
white achkan, ‘you’re not laughing at me, are you ?’

‘I’m not laughing at all,’ said Lata.‘Smiling, I meant.’

‘No, not at you,’ said Lata. ‘At myself.’

‘That’s very mysterious,’ said Maan. His good-naçtred face
melted into an expression of exaggerated perplexity.

‘It’ll have to remain so, I’m afraid,’ said Lata, almost laughing
now. ‘Aparna here wants her ice-cream, and I must supply it.’

‘Try the pistachio ice-cream,’ suggested Maan. His eyes
followed her pink sari for a few seconds. Good-looking ‘ girl in a way, he thought again. Pink’s the wrong colour for her
complexion, though. She should be dressed in deep green or
dark blue … like that woman there. His attention veered to a
new object of contemplation.

A few seconds later Lata bumped into her best friend, Malati,
a medical student who shared her room at the student hostel.
Malati was very outgoing and never lost her tongue with
strangers. Strangers, however, blinking into her lovely green
eyes, sometimes lost their tongues with her.

‘Who was that Cad you were talking to ?’ she asked Lata
eagerly.

This wasn’t as bad as it sounded. A good-looking young man,
in the slang of Brahmpur University girls, was a Cad. The term
derived from Cadbury’s chocolate.

‘Oh, that’s just Maan, he’s Fran’s younger brother.’

‘Really! But he’s so good-looking and Fran’s so, well, not
ugly, but, you know, dark, and nothing special.’

‘Maybe he’s a dark Cad,’ suggested Lata. ‘Bitter but
sustaining.’

Malati considered this.

‘And,’ continued Lata, ‘as my aunts have reminded me five
times in the last hour, I’m not all that fair either, and will
therefore find it impossible to get a suitable husband.’

‘How can you put up with them, Lata ?’ asked Malati, who
had been brought up, fatherless and brotherless, in a circle of
very supportive women.

‘Oh, I like most of them,’ said Lata. ‘And if it wasn’t for this
sort of speculation it wouldn’t be much of a wedding

»

I

10for them. Once they see the bride and groom together,
they’ll have an even better time. Beauty and the Beast.’

‘Well, he’s looked rather beast-like whenever I’ve seen him on
the university campus,’ said Malati. ‘Like a dark giraffe.’

‘Don’t be mean,’ said Lata, laughing. ‘Anyway, Fran’s very
popular as a lecturer,’ she continued. ‘And I like him. And
you’re going to have to visit me at his house once I leave the

hostel and start living there. And since he’ll be my brother-inlaw you’ll have to like him too. Promise me you will.’

‘I won’t,’ said Malati firmly. ‘He’s taking you away from me.’

‘He’s doing nothing of the sort, Malati,’ said Lata. ‘My
mother, with her fine sense of household economy, is dumping
me on him.’

‘Well, I don’t see why you should obey your mother. Tell her
you can’t bear to be parted from me.’

‘I always obey my mother,’ said Lata. ‘And besides, who will
pay my hostel fees if she doesn’t ? And it will be very nice for
me to live with Savita for a while. I refuse to lose you. You
really must visit us - you must keep visiting us. If you don’t,
I’ll know how much value to put on your friendship.’

Malati looked unhappy for a second or two, then recovered.
‘Who’s this?’ she asked. Aparna was looking at her in a severe
and uncompromising manner.

‘My niece, Aparna,’ said Lata. ‘Say hello to Malati Aunty,
Aparna.’

‘Hello,’ said Aparna, who had reached the end of her patience.
‘Can I have a pistachio ice-cream, please?’

‘Yes, kuchuk, of course, I’m sorry,’ said Lata. ‘Come, let’s all
go together and get some.’

1.4

LATA soon lost Malati to a clutch of college friends, but
before she and Aparna could get much further, they were
captured by Aparna’s parents.

ii’So there you are, you precious little runaway,’ said the
resplendent Meenakshi, implanting a kiss on her daughter’s
forehead. ‘Isn’t she precious, Arun? Now where ha|£‘you
been, you precious truant ?’

‘I went to find Daadi,’ began Aparna. ‘And then I found her,
but she had to go into the house because of Savita Bua, but I
couldn’t go with her, and then Lata Bua took me to have icecream, but we couldn’t because -‘ But Meenakshi had lost
interest and had turned to Lata. « } ‘That pink doesn’t really
suit you, Luts,’ said Meenakshi. ‘It lacks a certain - a certain -‘

‘Je ne sais quoi ?’ prompted a suave friend of her husband’s,
who was standing nearby.

‘Thank you,’ said Meenakshi, with such withering charm that
the young fellow glided away for a while and pretended to
stare at the stars.

‘No, pink’s just not right for you, Luts,’ re-affirmed
Meenakshi, stretching her long, tawny neck like a relaxed cat
and appraising her sister-in-law.

She herself was wearing a green-and-gold sari of Banaras silk,
with a green choli that exposed more of her midriff than
Brahmpur society was normally privileged or prepared to see.
i

‘Oh,’ said Lata, suddenly self-conscious. She knew she f
didn’t have much dress sense, and imagined she looked rather
drab standing next to this bird-of-paradise.

‘Who was that fellow you were talking to?’ demanded her
brother Arun, who, unlike his wife, had noticed Lata | talking
to Maan. Arun was twenty-five, a tall, fair, intelli- f gent,
pleasant-looking bully who kept his siblings in place by
pummelling their egos. He was fond of reminding them that
after their father’s death, he was ‘in a manner of speaking’, in
loco parentis to them. ‘That was Maan, Fran’s brother.’ ‘Ah.’
The word spoke volumes of disapproval. Arun and Meenakshi
had arrived just this morning by overnight train from Calcutta,
where Arun worked as one of the few Indian executives in the
prestigious and largely white firm of Bentsen & Pryce. He had
had neither the ;

I

time nor the desire to acquaint himself with the Kapoor family
- or clan, as he called it - with whom his mother had contrived
a match for his sister. He cast his eyes balefully around.
Typical of their type to overdo everything, he thought, looking
at the coloured lights in the hedge. The crassness of the state
politicians, white-capped and effusive, and of Mahesh
Kapoor’s contingent of rustic relatives excited his finely-tuned
disdain. And the fact that neither the brigadier from the
Brahmpur Cantonment nor the Brahmpur representatives of
companies like Burmah Shell, Imperial Tobacco, and Caltex
were represented in the crowd of invitees blinded his eyes to

the presence of the larger part of the professional elite of
Brahmpur.

‘A bit of a bounder, I’d say,’ said Arun, who had noticed
Maan’s eyes casually following Lata before he had turned
them elsewhere.

Lata smiled, and her meek brother Varun, who was a nervous
shadow to Arun and Meenakshi, smiled too in a kind of stifled
complicity. Varun was studying - or trying to study mathematics at Calcutta University, and he lived with Arun
and Meenakshi in their small ground-floor flat. He was thin,
unsure of himself, sweet-natured and shiftyeyed; and he was
Lata’s favourite. Though he was a year older than her, she felt
protective of him. Varun was terrified, in different ways, of
both Arun and Meenakshi, and in some ways even of the
precocious Aparna. His enjoyment of mathematics was mainly
limited to the calculation of odds and handicaps on the racing
form. In winter, as Varun’s excitement rose with the racing
season, so did his elder brother’s ire. Arun was fond of calling
him a bounder as well.

And what would you know about bounding, Arun Bhai ?
thought Lata to herself. Aloud she said: ‘He seemed quite
nice.’

‘An Aunty we met called him a Cad,’ contributed Aparna.

‘Did she, precious ?’ said Meenakshi, interested. ‘Do point
him out to me, Arun.’ But Maan was now nowhere to be seen.!

‘I blame myself to some extent,’ said Arun in a voice which
implied nothing of the sort; Arun was not capable of blaming

himself for anything. ‘I really shoul^“have done something,’
he continued. ‘If I hadn’t been so tied up with work, I might
have prevented this whole fiasco. But once Ma got it into her
head that this Kapoor chap was suitable, it was impossible to
dissuade her. It’s impossible to talk reason with Ma ; she just
turns on the waterworks.’ * *’ t

What had also helped deflect Arun’s suspicions had been the
fact that Dr Pran Kapoor taught English. And yet, to Arun’s
chagrin, there was hardly an English face in this whole
provincial crowd.

‘How fearfully dowdy!’ said Meenakshi wearily to herself,
encapsulating her husband’s thoughts. ‘And how utterly unlike
Calcutta. Precious, you have smut on your nose,’ she added to
Aparna, half looking around to tell an imaginary ayah to wipe
it off with a handkerchief.

‘I’m enjoying it here,’ Varun ventured, seeing Lata look hurt.
He knew that she liked Brahmpur, though it was clearly no
metropolis.

‘You be quiet,’ snapped Arun brutally. His judgment was
being challenged by his subordinate, and he would have none
of it.

Varun struggled with himself; he glared, then looked down.

‘Don’t talk about what you don’t understand,’ added Arun,
putting the boot in.

Varun glowered silently.

‘Did you hear me ?’

‘Yes,’ said Varun.

‘Yes, what ?’

‘Yes, Arun Bhai,’ muttered Varun.

This pulverization was standard fare for Varun, and Lata was
not surprised by the exchange. But she felt very bad for him,
and indignant with Arun. She could not understand either the
pleasure or the purpose of it. She decided she would speak to
Varun as soon after the wed- j ding as possible to try to help
him withstand - at least !

I

internally - such assaults upon his spirit. Even if I’m not very
good at withstanding them myself, Lata thought.

‘Well, Arun Bhai,’ she said innocently, ‘I suppose it’s too late.
We’re all one big happy family now, and we’ll have to put up
with each other as well as we can.’

The phrase, however, was not innocent. ‘One big happy
family’ was an ironically used Chatterji phrase. Meenakshi
Mehra had been a Chatterji before she and Arun had met at a
cocktail party, fallen in torrid, rapturous and elegant love, and
got married within a month, to the shock of both families.

Whether or not Mr Justice Chatterji of the Calcutta High Court
and his wife were happy to welcome the non-Bengali Arun as
the first appendage to their ring of five children (plus Cuddles
the dog), and whether or not Mrs Rupa Mehra had been
delighted at the thought of her first-born, the apple of her eye,
marrying outside the khatri caste (and to a spoilt
supersophisticate like Meenakshi at that), Arun certainly
valued the Chatterji connection greatly. The Chatterjis had
wealth and position and a grand Calcutta house where they
threw enormous (but tasteful) parties. And even if the big
happy family, especially Meenakshi’s brothers and sisters,
sometimes bothered him with their endless, unchokable wit
and improvised rhyming couplets, he accepted it precisely
because it appeared to him to be undeniably urbane. It was a
far cry from this provincial capital, this Kapoor crowd and
these garish light-in-the-hedge celebrations - with
pomegranate juice in lieu of alcohol !

‘What precisely do you mean by that ?’ demanded Arun of
Lata. ‘Do you think that if Daddy had been alive we would
have married into this sort of a family ?’

Arun hardly seemed to care that they might be overheard. Lata
flushed. But the brutal j jint was well made. Had Raghubir
Mehra not died in his forties but continued his meteoric rise in
the Railway Service, he would - when the British left Indian
government service in droves in 1947 - certainly have become
a member of the Railway Board. His excellence and
experience might even have made him the Chairman. The
family would not have had to struggle,I

as it had had to for years and was still forced to, on Mrs Rupa
Mehra’s depleted savings, the kindness of friends and, lately,
her elder son’s salary. She would not hjve haJ to sell most of
her jewellery and even their small house in Darjeeling to give
her children the schooling which she felt that, above

everything else, they must have. Beneath her pervasive
sentimentality - and her attachment to the seem-, ingly secure
physical objects that reminded her of her beloved husband lay a sense of sacrifice and a sense or* values that
determinedly melted them down into the insecure, intangible
benefits of an excellent English-medium; boarding-school
education. And so Arun and Varun had’ continued to go to St
George’s School, and Savita and Lata had not been withdrawn
from St Sophia’s Convent.

The Kapoors might be all very well for Brahmpur society,
thought Arun, but if Daddy had been alive, a constellation of
brilliant matches would have been strewn at the feet of the
Mehras. At least he, for one, had overcome their
circumstances and done well in the way of in-laws. What
possible comparison could there be between Pran’s brother,
that ogling fellow whom Lata had just been talking to - who
ran, of all things, a cloth shop in Banaras, from what Arun had
heard - and, say, Meenakshi’s elder brother, who had been to
Oxford, was studying law at Lincoln’s Inn, and was, in
addition, a published poet ? I

Arun’s speculations were brought down to earth by his ‘
daughter, who threatened to scream if she didn’t get her icecream. She knew from experience that screaming (or L even
the threat of it) worked wonders with her parents, f And, after
all, they sometimes screamed at each other, and often at the
servants. ,

Lata looked guilty. ‘It’s my fault, darling,’ she said to i
Aparna. ‘Let’s go at once before we get caught up in
something else. But you mustn’t cry or yell, promise me that.
It won’t work with me.’ Aparna, who knew it wouldn’t, was
silent. But just at that moment the bridegroom emerged from
one side of the house, dressed all in white, his dark, rather |

nervous face veiled with hanging strings of white flowers;
everyone crowded forward towards the door from which the
bride would emerge; and Aparna, lifted into her Lata Bua’s
arms, was forced to defer once again both treat and threat.

1.5

IT was a little untraditional, Lata couldn’t help thinking, that
Pran hadn’t ridden up to the gate on a white horse with a little
nephew sitting in front of him and with the groom’s party in
tow to claim his bride; but then Prem Nivas was the groom’s
house after all. And no doubt if he had followed the
convention, Arun would have found further cause for
mockery. As it was, Lata found it difficult to imagine the
lecturer on Elizabethan Drama under that veil of tuberoses. He
was now placing a garland of dark red, heavily fragrant roses
around her sister Savita’s neck and Savita was doing the same
to him. She looked lovely in her red-and-gold wedding sari,
and quite subdued; Lata thought she might even have been
crying. Her head was covered, and she looked down at the
ground as her mother had doubtless instructed her to do. It was
not proper, even when she was putting the garland round his
neck, that she should look full in the face of the man with
whom she was to live her life.

The welcoming ceremony completed, bride and groom moved
together to the middle of the garden, where a small platform,
decorated with more white flowers and open to the auspicious
stars, had been erected. Here the priests, one from each family,
and Mrs Rupa Mehra and the parents of the groom sat around
the small fire that would be the witness of their vows.

Mrs Rupa Mehra’s brother, whom the family very rarely met,
had earlier in the day taken charge of he bangle ceremony.
Arun was annoyed that he had not been allowed to take charge

of anything. He had suggested to his mother after the crisis
brought on by his grandfather’s inexplicableIt.

But it was too late for th °VC j weddmg to Calcuttavo’ces rose
to the skies and Quite drowned out the irrelevant it- at’ and she
would not hear ochant of the ceremonies.

Now that the exchange f t** Lata, however, stood close by and
watched with an

Paid no great attention to f. ands was °ver, the crowoattentive
mixture of fascination and dismay. The two bare-

would go on for the better C aCf wedding rites. Thes chested
priests, one very fat and one fairly thin, both

milled and chattered round h” 1 ^ ^°Ur Wm*e the guest!
apparently immune to the cold, were locked in mildly

laughed; they shook hand C fwjïso^^rem Nivas. Thei insistent
competition as to who knew a more elaborate

heads ; they coalesced into 1 “I °r tnem to their fore- ^orm °^
the seryice- So, while the stars stayed their courses

women there; they warmed’ ^ S’ the men herertitt m order to
keeP the auspicious time in abeyance, the

“lied clay stoves placed str * em!, es at the charcoal- Sanskrit
wound interminably on. Even the groom’s parents

while their frosted, gossip-lad ^‘h* around the garden were
asked ^ the fat Priest to rePeat something after him.

they admired the multicol ^n br£ath rose into the air’ Mahesh
Kapoor’s eyebrows were quivering; he was about

Photographer as he murmured” s7 A ‘ ^ Smiled for *« l° W°W
hi§ rathef sh°rt fuse“

they breathed deeply the see f fl P ase! in English; Lata tried to
imagine what Savita was thinking. How

cooked spices; they exchanged °h’ L Wers and Perfume and
cou^ sne nave agreed to get married without knowing this

tics and scandal under the h’ £ i $ ^ deatns and poli- man?
Kind-hearted and accommodating though she was,

at the back of the garden b”g ^coloured cloth canopy she did
have views of her own. Lata loved her deeply and

rood had been laid out; the^* ,wmc^ ‘ong tables of admired
her generous, even temper; the evenness was

chairs with their plates full *A** ,own exhaustedly on
certainly a contrast to her own erratic swings of mood.

Servants, some in white liv ^ tU in inexhaustibly. Savita was
free from any vanity about her fresh and lovely

around fruit juice and tea a “dT’ ff “^ ‘” knaki’ Bought looks ;
but didn’t she rebel against the fact that Pran would

who were standing in the H ^ snacks to those fail the most
lenient test of glamour ? Did Savita really

Jaddus, gulab-jamuns, barfis and , Samosas kachauris, accept
that Mother knew best ? It was difficult to speak to

consumed and replenished al ° ga?a,f and ice-cream were
Savita, or sometimes even to guess what she was thinking.

°f vegetables. Friends who h°H PU“S and Slx kinds Since
Lata had Sone to college, it was Malati rather than

months fell upon each Qther na^ n°t met each other for her
sister who had become her confidante. And Malati, she

met only at weddings and fu ™ l C”es’ relatives who knew’
would never have agreed to be married off in this

exchanged the latest news nf£-j embraced tearfully and
summary manner by all the mothers in the world

Lata’« “rougiit •««»•”» ^m «’“

“•-”nv i.v-wi,i a&amoi u«, i^».i. mat i i^ii wuuiu who were
standing in the A sn^ks to those fail the most lenient test of
glamour ? Did Savita really laddus. p-nl’ik ; , _ garden:
samosac !,„„! • ir he was returning her affectionate look. It was
too much.

Lata forgot that she had been defending Pran to Mala( just a
short while ago, and began to discover things t( irritate herself
with.

‘Prem Nivas’ for a start: the abode of love. An idioti^ name,
thought Lata crossly, for this house of arrange! marriages. And
a needlessly grandiloquent one: as if i were the centre of the
universe and felt obliged to make i philosophical statement
about it. And the scene, looked a. objectively, was absurd :
seven living people, none of then stupid, sitting around a fire
intoning a dead language thai only three of them understood.
And yet, Lata thought, ha mind wandering from one thing to
another, perhaps this little fire was indeed the centre of the
universe. For here il burned, in the middle of this fragrant
garden, itself in the heart of Pasand Bagh, the pleasantest
locality of Brahmpur, which was the capital of the state of
Purva Pradesh, which lay in the centre of the Gangetic plains,
which was itself the heartland of India … and so on through
the galaxies to the outer limits of perception and knowledge.
The thought did not seem in. the kast trite to Lata; it VitVpêà
rier control her irritation at, indeed resentment of, Pran. |

‘Speak up ! Speak up ! If your mother had mumbled like you,
we would never have got married.’

Mahesh Kapoor had turned impatiently towards his dumpy
little wife, who became even more tongue-tied as a result.

Pran turned and smiled encouragingly at his mother, and
quickly rose again in Lata’s estimation.

Mahesh Kapoor frowned, but held his peace for a few minutes,
after which he burst out, this time to the family priest :

‘Is this mumbo-jumbo going to go on for ever ?’ j

The priest said something soothing in Sanskrit, as if [

»

blessing Mahesh Kapoor, who felt obliged to lapse into an
irked silence. He was irritated for several reasons, one of
which was the distinct and unwelcome sight of his arch
political rival, the Home Minister, deep in conversation with
the large and venerable Chief Minister S.S. Sharma. What
could they be plotting? he thought. My stupid wife insisted on
inviting Agarwal because our daughters are friends, even
though she knew it would sour things for me. And now the
Chief Minister is talking to him as if no one else exists. And in
my garden !

His other major irritation was directed at Mrs Rupa Mehra.
Mahesh Kapoor, once he had taken over the arrangements, had
set his heart on inviting a beautiful and renowned singer of
ghazals to perform at Prem Nivas, as was the tradition
whenever anyone in his family got married. But Mrs Rupa
Mehra, though she was not even paying for the wedding, had
put her foot down. She could not have ‘that sort of person’
singing love-lyrics at the wedding of her daughter. ‘That sort
of person’ meant both a Muslim and a courtesan.

Mahesh Kapoor muffed his responses, and the priest repeated
them gently.

‘Yes, yes, go on, go on,’ said Mahesh Kapoor. He glowered at
the fire.

But now Savita was being given away by her mother with a
handful of rose-petals, and all three women were in tears.

Really! thought Mahesh Kapoor. They’ll douse the flames. He
looked in exasperation at the main culprit, whose sobs were
the most obstreperous.

But Mrs Rupa Mehra was not even bothering to tuck her
handkerchief back into her blouse. Her eyes were red and her
nose and cheeks were flushed with weeping. She was thinking
back to her own wedding. The scent of 4711 eau-de-Cologne
brought back unbearably happy memories of her late husband.
Then she thought downwards one generation to her beloved
Savita who would soon be walking around this fire with Pran
to begin her own married life. May it be a longer one than
mine, prayed MrsI

Rupa Mehra. May she wear this very sari to her owi
daughter’s wedding. \

She also thought upwards a generation to he^fathei and this
brought on a fresh gush of tears. What th septuagenarian
radiologist Dr Kishen Chand Seth haï taJcen offence at, no one
knew: probably something said o done by his friend Mahesh
Kapoor, but quite possibly b] his own daughter; no one could
tell for sure. Apart fron repudiating his duties as a host, he had

chosen not even tr» attend his granddaughter’s wedding, and
had gone furi ously off to Delhi ‘for a conference of
cardiologists’, as ht claimed. He had taken with him the
insufferable Parvati, his thirty-five-year-old second wife, who
was ten yearsl younger than Mrs Rupa Mehra herself. f

It was also possible, though this did not cross his daughter’s
mind, that Dr Kishen Chand Seth would have gone mad at the
wedding had he attended it, and had in fact fled from that
specific eventuality. Short and trim though hel had always
been, he was enormously fond of food; but1 owing to a
digestive disorder combined with diabetes his diet was now
confined to boiled eggs, weak tea, lemon i squash, and
arrowroot biscuits. f

I don’t care who stares at me, I have plenty of reasons to cry,
said Mrs Rupa Mehra to herself defiantly. I am so( happy and
heartbroken today. But her heartbreak lasted| only a few
minutes more. The groom an^ ‘-:Jarnim^l «•!-« c

f

«noititK lasted

„ ~ *v.w minutes more. The groom and bride walked around
the fire seven times, Savita keeping her head meekly down,
her eyelashes wet with tears ; and Pran and she were man and
wife.

After a few concluding words by the priests, everyone ( rose.
The newly-weds were escorted to a flower-shrouded I bench
near a sweet-smelling, rough-leafed harsingar tree in I white
and orange bloom ; and congratulations fell on them and their

parents and all the Mehras and Kapoors present as copiously
as those delicate flowers fall to the ground at dawn.

Mrs Rupa Mehra’s joy was unconfined. She gobbled the
congratulations down like forbidden gulab-jamuns. She looked
a little speculatively at her younger daughter, who

appeared to be laughing at her from a distance. Or was she
laughing at her sister? Well, she would find out soon enough
what the happy tears of matrimony were all about !

Fran’s much-shouted-at mother, subdued yet happy, after
blessing her son and daughter-in-law, and failing to see her
younger son Maan anywhere, had gone over to her daughter
Veena. Veena embraced her; Mrs Mahesh Kapoor, temporarily
overcome, said nothing, but sobbed and smiled
simultaneously. The dreaded Home Minister and his daughter
Priya joined them for a few minutes, and in return for their
congratulations, Mrs Mahesh Kapoor had a few kind words to
say to each of them. Priya, who was married and virtually
immured by her in-laws in a house in the old, cramped part of
Brahmpur, said, rather wistfully, that the garden looked
beautiful. And it was true, thought Mrs Mahesh Kapoor with
quiet pride : the garden was indeed looking beautiful. The
grass was rich, the gardenias were creamy and fragrant, and a
few chrysanthemums and roses were already in bloom. And
though she could take no credit for the sudden, prolific
blossoming of the harsingar tree, that was surely the grace of
the gods whose prized and contested possession, in mythical
times, it used to be.

1.6

HER lord and master the Minister of Revenue was meanwhile
accepting congratulations from the Chief Minister of Purva
Pradesh, Shri S.S. Sharma. Sharmaji was rather a hulking man
with a perceptible limp and an unconscious and slight
vibration of the head, which was exacerbated when, as now, he
had had a long day. He ran the state with a mixture of guile,
charisma and benevolence. Delhi was far away and rarely
interested in his legislative and administrative fief. Though he
was uncommunicative about his discussion with his Home
Minister, he was nevertheless in good spirits.

Z3s ‘g tly nasal voice to Mahesh if™ Rudnia he said in hbeen
an active member of the Muslim League ; and though 5o
you’re cultivating a rural P°or: he had not lived to see the birth
of Pakistan, that above all

z and Imtiaz anywhere, have Kapoor, after walking slowly

rural constituen

no

cy- By way Of

‘Ose to

, nis Sectoral home and Y glnable that he Wouij ‘No, no - but I
haven’t seen my son either, so I rural constituency. By way of
^ *° COntest from assume….’

Lh?^! t,he nandsome black LlT^T’ he indicated hi, The Nawab
Sahib ralsed his hands slightly, palms for“gnt otf-white m,; .
acnkan he was „,„.._• Vs ,,,,r^ ir, , ™«t,,r^ «f l,»i^i»eo«»^

*« h* ;„,,—’

Pyjamas, and rh k n Was Wearing the war-‘ m a gesture of
helplessness, l their „„ . . onlliantlv emr,r^;5’ After a while he
said : ‘So Pran

_. -..^ L-ujnandy embroidered

^ juus with their up-turned toes would present an

incongruous picture in a rice field.

‘Why, nothing is impossible in politics,’ said Sharmaji slowly.
‘After your Zamindari Abolition R-” -

you will berr,rr,~ - ‘

After a while he said: ‘So Pran is married, and Maan is next. I
would imagine you will find him a little less tractable.’

‘Well, tractable or not, there are some people in Ba-

you u -H k y ^arnmdari Ah r • ia ^narrnaii wel1’ tractaDle or
not, tftere are some people m K

choJ C°me a hero throueho, /T“ B’J1 goes through naras l
have been talking to” said Mahesh Kapoor in

Sharni ^ C°Uld bec°me Chief JU countryside. If you
determined tone. ‘Maan has met the father. He’s also

his eyeJ1f^ner°UsJy and warily fTT^ ^Y n°t?’ said ^ cl°th
business’ We’re making enquiries. Let’s see. Ai

srrnlr; i °n the Nawab Sak’k6 °°ke~ around, anr) what about
your twins ? A joint wedding to two sisters ?’

court“8 beard and Jooking of «aitar, who was s see’ let’s see”
said the Nawab Sahib- thinki,

added’ you might lose a friend or r° Perplexedjy- ‘Of rather
sadly about his wife’ buried these many year

j^j L wo in the process ‘ he ‘Inshallah, all of them will settle
down soon enough.’

^15^r“—:s:r/—‘i

^f^*S^^ ‘if my father h ^ ImtiaZ Iau8hed’

more. Oh GodF O” behalf °f tw° People^And?*8 ** Shut “P’
b°th °f y°U” Sa’d F’r°Z’ attemPting to aPPear

‘What - v e ‘ 1ater ft more annoyed than he was ; he had had
enough of this sort

asked Firoz half.3 if lsnt gating you marri^ a • , of nonsenseTm g°ing down- At)ta will be wondering

‘Well, the buff Sy e“ a smile andTfro “ Ci where °n earth
we’ve g0t tO” And s° wil1 your father’ And

disconsôlatelv “w” Z°ne disaPpeared tonight ^“’-j ! besides,
we ought to find out if your brother is formally

‘No, no thank Vean0ther” * * ** married yet - and whether
you really do now have a

enjoyed his d ^ u St’^ ^ave Plenty ‘ said P’ * l beautiful sisterin-law to scold you and curb your

father would with a «lightly e,,i]fv /“?’ F’ro: excesses-‘

the happy hourTi!”0^611 Jess than Maan? «t ^ h’i ‘M ri§ht’
a11 ri8ht’ we’U a11 8° down“ said Maan

‘God knows j ‘ 3 d uncertainly. when| genially. ‘Maybe some
of the bees will cling to us too. And

‘At the firs/r ÛjS- 3t the enquiry stage ‘ said )U I if we get
stung to the heart, Doctor Sahib here can cure us.

For some teas’ Imt’aZ added’ ‘ “’ I Cant y°U’ Imtiaz? A11
y°u would have to do would be to

readingF he ren3501!} ^”s de^ghted Maan ‘A f, I app’y a
rose“Peta”to r^e wound isn’t that so ?’ third reading i A j’
‘^ell, let’s hope it n^ ^rsl ‘As ‘ong as t^lere are no contraindications,’ said Imtiaz

withholds his ass r’ ^ ‘f if do“’ that th” ? tO thl seriouslyHe
laueheH ss^nt- e * resident| ‘No centra-indications,’ said
Maan, laughing as he led

,k~,… .._ ë 3nd took a Connie «f !_.. . I thr wav Hnwn fbp
stairs

: plenty,’ slightly ;

«aid Maai

«id Firoz. FirV

-^-^ «.nu rook a couple of long swigs. ‘And what! about your
marriage ?’ he demanded of Firoz. I

Firoz looked a little evasively around the room. It was asl bare
and functional as most of the rooms in Prem Nivas -1 which
looked as if they expected the imminent arrival of a I herd of
constituents. ‘My marriage !’ he said with a laugh. I Maan
nodded vigorously. M

‘Change the subject,’ said Firoz. •

‘Why, if you were to go into the garden instead of* drinking
here in seclusion -‘ I

‘It’s hardly seclusion.’ •

‘Don’t interrupt,’ said Maan, throwing an arm around f him.
‘If you were to go down into the garden, a good- | looking,
elegant fellow like you, you would be surrounded within
seconds by eligible young beauties. And ineligible I ones too.
They’d cling to you like bees to a lotus. Curly I Jocks, curly
locks, will you be mine ?’ ‘

Firoz flushed. ‘You’ve got rhf ~:~-:t-

c-j.VI ‘»’

_ …v,, uccs to a lotus. Curly .vo, vuny locks, will you be mine
?’

Firoz flushed. ‘You’ve got the simile slightly wrong,’ he said.
‘Men are bees, women lotuses.’ Maan quoted a couplet from
an Urdu ghazal to the

‘ -“

“‘en lotuses a couplet from a

2.6

besides, we ought to find out if your brother is formally
married yet - and whether you really do now have a beautiful
sister-in-law to scold you and curb your excesses.’

‘All right, all right, we’ll all go down,’ said Maan genially.
‘Maybe some of the bees will cling to us too. And if we get
stung to the heart, Doctor Sahib here can cure us. Can’t you,
Imtiaz ? All you would have to do would be to apply a rosepetal to the wound, isn’t that so ?’

‘As long as there are no contra-indications,’ said Imtiaz
seriously.

‘No contra-indications,’ said Maan, laughing as he led the way
down the stairs.

‘You may laugh,’ said Imtiaz. ‘But some people are allergic
even to rose-petals. Talking of which, you have one sticking to
your cap.’

‘Do I ?’ asked Maan. ‘These things float down from nowhere.’

‘So they do,’ said Firoz, who v/as walking down just behind
him. He gently brushed it away.

1.8

BECAUSE the Nawab Sahib had been looking somewhat lost
without his sons, Mahesh Kapoor’s daughter Veena had drawn
him into her family circle. She asked him about his eldest
child, his daughter Zainab, who was a childhood friend of hers

but who, after her marriage, had disappeared into the world of
purdah. The old man talked about her rather guardedly, but
about her two children with transparent delight. His
grandchildren were the only two beings in the world who had
the right to interrupt him when heI

was studying in his library. But now the great yellcr,

ancestral mansion of Baitar House, just a few minuta

walk from Prem Ni vas, was somewhat run dowrfclind tli

library too had suffered. ‘Silverfish, you know,’ “said tlj

Nawab Sahib. ‘And I need help with cataloguing. It’s f

gigantic task, and in some ways not very heartening. Son|

of the early editions of Ghalib can’t be traced now; an|

some valuable manuscripts by our own poet Mast. M.

brother never made a list of what he took with him*%

Pakistan ‘ j

At the word Pakistan, Veena’s mother-in-law, withered old
Mrs Tandon, flinched. Three years ago, her wholi family had
had to flee the blood and flames and unforgettable terror of
Lahore. They had been wealthy, ‘propertied people, but almost
everything they had owned was lost and they had been lucky
to escape with their lives. Her son Kedarnath, Veena’s
husband, still had scars on his hands from an attack by rioters
on his refugee convoy. Several of their friends had been
butchered. .

The young, old Mrs Tandon thought bitterly, are veryj
resilient: her grandchild Bhaskar had of course only been! six
at the time; but even Veena and Kedarnath had not let* those
events embitter their lives. They had returned here to Veena’s
hometown, and Kedarnath had set himself up in a small way in
- of all polluting, carcass-tainted things - the shoe trade. For
old Mrs Tandon, the descent from a decent | prosperity could
not have been more painful. She had been f willing to tolerate
talking to the Nawab Sahib though he | was a Muslim, but
when he mentioned comings and goings from Pakistan, it was
too much for her imagination. She felt ill. The pleasant chatter
of the garden in Brahmpur was amplified into the cries of the
blood-mad mobs on the streets of Lahore, the lights into fire.
Daily, sometimes hourly, in her imagination she returned to
what she still thought of as her city and her home. It had been
beautiful before it had become so suddenly hideous ; it had
appeared completely secure so shortly before it was lost for
ever.

The Nawab Sahib did not notice that anything was the matter,
but Veena did, and quickly changed the subject

I

even at the cost of appearing rude. ‘Where’s Bhaskar ?’ she
asked her husband.

‘I don’t know. I think I saw him near the food, the little frog,’
said Kedarnath.

‘I wish you wouldn’t call him that,’ said Veena. ‘He is your
son. It’s not auspicious ‘

‘It’s not my name for him, it’s Maan’s,’ said Kedarnath with a
smile. He enjoyed being mildly henpecked. ‘But I’ll call him
whatever you want me to.’

Veena led her mother-in-law away. And to distract the old lady
she did in fact get involved in looking for her son. Finally they
found Bhaskar. He was not eating anything but simply
standing under the great multicoloured cloth canopy that
covered the food tables, gazing upwards with pleased and
abstract wonderment at the elaborate geometrical patterns - red
rhombuses, green trapeziums, yellow squares and blue
triangles - from which it had been stitched together.

1.9

THE crowds had thinned; the guests, some chewing paan,
were departing at the gate; a heap of gifts had grown by the
side of the bench where Pran and Savita had been sitting.
Finally only they and a few members of the family were left and the yawning servants who would put away the more
valuable furniture for the night, or pack the gifts in a trunk
under the watchful eye of Mrs Rupa Mehra.

The bride and groom were lost in their thoughts. They avoided
looking at each other now. They would spend the night in a
carefully prepared room in Prem Nivas, and leave for a week’s
honeymoon in Simla tomorrow.

Lata tried to imagine the nuptial room. Presumably it would be
fragrant with tuberoses; that, at least, was Malati’s confident
opinion. I’ll always associate tuberoses with Pran, Lata
thought. It was not at all pleasant to follow her imagination
further. That Savita would be sleeping with Pran tonight did
not bear thinking of. It did!

not strike her as being at all romande. Perhaps they woul/ be
too exhausted, she thought optimistically. ‘What are you
thinking of, Lata ?’ asked her motlter; i

‘Oh, nothing, Ma, ‘ said Lata automatically. * f

‘You turned up your nose. I saw it.’ Lata blushed.

‘I don’t think I ever want to get married,’ she sai(
emphatically.

Mrs Rupa Mehra was too wearied by the wedding, -to* ;t

exhausted by emotion, too softened by Sanskrit, too cum

bered with congratulations, too overwrought, in short, to

do anything but stare at Lata for ten seconds. What on

earth had got into the girl ? What was good enough for her

mother and her mother’s mother and her mother’s mother’s;

mother should be good enough for her. Lata, though, had*

always been a difficult one, with a strange will of her own!

quiet but unpredictable - like that time in St Sophia’s!

when she had wanted to become a nun! But Mrs Rupaf

Mehra too had a will, and she was determined to have her|

own way, even if she was under no illusions as to Lata’s j

pliability. I

And yet, Lata was named after that most pliable thing, a I vine,
which was trained to cling : first to her family, then f to her
husband. Indeed, when she was a baby, Lata’s \ fingers had
had a strong and coiling grasp which even now f came back
with a sweet vividness to her mother. Suddenly Mrs Rupa
Mehra burst out with the inspired remark :

‘Lata, you are a vine, you must cling to your husband !’

It was not a success.

‘Cling?’ said Lata. ‘Cling?’ The word was pronounced with
such quiet scorn that her mother could not help bursting into
tears. How terrible it was to have an ungrateful daughter. And
how unpredictable a baby could be.

Now that the tears were running down her cheeks, Mrs Rupa
Mehra transferred them fluidly from one daughter to the other.
She clasped Savita to her bosom and wept loudly. ‘You must
write to me, Savita darling,’ she said. ‘You must write to me
every day from Simla. Pran, you are

P

30

like my own son now, you must be responsible and see to it.
Soon I will be all alone in Calcutta - all alone.’

This was of course quite untrue. Arun and Varun and
Meenakshi and Aparna would all be crowded together with her
in Arun’s little flat in Sunny Park. But Mrs Rupa Mehra was
one who believed with unformulated but absolute conviction
in the paramountcy of subjective over objective truth.

1.10

THE tonga clip-clopped along the road, and the tongawallah
sang out :

‘A heart was shattered into bits - and one fell here, and one fell
there ‘

Varun started to hum along, then sang louder, then suddenly
stopped.

‘Oh, don’t stop,’ said Malati, nudging Lata gently. ‘You have a
nice voice. Like a bulbul.’

‘In a china-china-shop,’ she whispered to Lata.

‘Heh, heh, heh.’ Varun’s laugh was nervous. Realizing that it
sounded weak, he tried to make it slightly sinister. But it didn’t
work. He felt miserable. And Malati, with her green eyes and
sarcasm - for it had to be sarcasm - wasn’t helping.

The tonga was quite crowded: Varun was sitting with young
Bhaskar in the front, next to the tonga-wallah; and back-toback with them sat Lata and Malati - both dressed in salwaarkameez - and Aparna in her ice-creamstained sweater and a
frock. It was a sunny winter morning.

The white-turbaned old tonga-wallah enjoyed driving
furiously through this part of town with its broad, relatively
uncrowded streets - unlike the cramped madness of Old
Brahmpur. He started talking to his horse, urging her on.

Malati now began to sing the words of the popular film song
herself. She hadn’t meant to discourage Varun. It waspleasant
to think of shattered hearts on a cloudlesj

morning. j

Varun didn’t join in. But after a while he took h|me id

his hands and said, turning around : I

‘You have a - a wonderful voice. ‘ I

It was true. Malati loved music, and studied classical

singing under Ustad Majeed Khan, one of the finest singeri

in north India. She had even got Lata interested in Indian!

classical music during the time they had lived togetherm

the student hostel. As a result, Lata often found hersel»

humming some tune or other in one of her favourite raags. I

Malati did not disclaim Varun’s compliment. •

‘Do you think so?’ she said, turning around to look»

deeply into his eyes. ‘You are very sweet to say so.’ I

Varun blushed to the depths of his soul and was speech-1

less for a few minutes. But as they passed the Brahmpur»

Race-course, he gripped the tonga-wallah’s arm and cried: I

‘Stop F •

‘What’s the matter ?’ asked Lata. B

‘Oh - nothing - nothing - if we’re in a hurry, Jet’s go •

on. Yes, let’s go on.’ •

‘Of course we’re not, Varun Bhai,’ she said. ‘We’re only I
going to the zoo. Let’s stop if you want.’ •

After they had got down, Varun, almost uncontrollably I
excited, wandered to the white palings and stared through. I
‘It’s the only anti-clockwise race-course in India other F than
Lucknow,’ he breathed, almost to himself, awestruck. ‘They
say it’s based on the Derby,’ he added to

young Bhaskar, who happened to be standing next to him.

‘But what’s the difference?’ asked Bhaskar. ‘The distance is
the same, isn’t it, whether you run clockwise or anticlockwise
?’

Varun paid no attention to Bhaskar’s question. He had started
walking slowly, dreamily, by himself, anti-clockwise along the
fence. He was almost pawing the earth. Lata caught up with
him : ‘Varun Bhai ?’ she said.

‘Er - yes ? Yes ?’

‘About yesterday evening.’

\

‘Yesterday evening ?’ Varun dragged himself back to the twolegged world. ‘What happened ?’

‘Our sister got married.’

‘Ah. Oh. Yes, yes, I know. Savita,’ he added, hoping to imply
alertness by specificity.

‘Well,’ said Lata, ‘don’t let yourself be bullied by Arun Bhai.
Just don’t.’ She stopped smiling, and looked at him as a
shadow crossed his face. ‘I really hate it, Varun Bhai, I really
hate seeing him bully you. I don’t mean that you should cheek

him or answer back or anything, just that you shouldn’t let it
hurt you the way that - well, that I can see it does.’

‘No, no -‘ he said, uncertainly.

‘Just because he’s a few years older doesn’t make him your
father and teacher and sergeant-major all rolled into one.’

Varun nodded unhappily. He was too well aware that while he
lived in his elder brother’s house he was subject to his elder
brother’s will.

‘Anyway, I think you should be more confident,’ continued
Lata. ‘Arun Bhai tries to crush everyone around him like a
steamroller, and it’s up to us to remove our egos from his path.
I have a hard enough time, and I’m not even in Calcutta. I just
thought I’d say so now, because at the house I’ll hardly get the
chance to talk to you alone. And tomorrow you’ll be gone.’

Lata spoke from experience, as Varun well knew. Arun, when
angry, hardly cared what he said. When Lata had taken it into
her head to become a nun - a foolish, adolescent notion, but
her own - Arun, exasperated with the lack of success of his
bludgeoning attempts at dissuasion, had said: ‘All right, go
ahead, become a nun, ruin your life, no one would have
married you anyway, you look just like the Bible - flat in front
and flat at the back.’ Lata thanked God that she wasn’t
studying at Calcutta University; for most of the year at least,
she was outside the range of Arun’s blunderbuss. Even though
those words were no longer true, the memory of them still
stung.

‘I wish you were in Calcutta,’ said Varun.‘Surely you must
have some friends -‘ said Lata. ‘Well, in the evening Arun
Bhai and Meenakshi Bhabhi are often out and I have to mind
Aparna,’ said f arun, smih’ng weakly. ‘Not that I mind,’ he
added.

‘Varun, this won’t do,’ said Lata. She placed her hand

firmly on his slouching shoulder and said: ‘I want you tof

go out with your friends - with people you really like and:

who like you - for at least two evenings a week. Pretend’

you have to attend a coaching session or something.’ Lata*

didn’t care for deception, and she didn’t know whether1

Varun would be any good at it, but she didn’t want things ;

to continue as they were. She was worried about Varun, \

He had looked even more jittery at the wedding than when

she had seen him a few months previously. j

A train hooted suddenly from alarmingly close, and the tonga
horse shied. \

‘How amazing,’ said Varun to himself, all thoughts of J

everything else obliterated. i

He patted the horse when they got back into the tonga. [

‘How far is the station from here ?’ he asked the tonga- (

wallah. j

‘Oh, it’s just over there,’ said the tonga-wallah, indicating
vaguely the built-up area beyond the well-laid-out gardens of
the race-course. ‘Not far from the zoo. ‘

I wonder if it gives the local horses an advantage, Varun said
to himself. Would the others tend to bolt? What difference
would it make to the odds ?

1.11

WHEN they got to the zoo, Bhaskar and Aparna joined forces
and asked to ride on the children’s railway, which, Bhaskar
noted, also went around anti-clockwise. Lata and Malati
wanted a walk after the tonga ride, but they were overruled.
All five of them sat in a small, post-box-red ‘ compartment,
squashed together and facing each other this I time, while the

little green steam engine puffed along on its p one-foot-wide
track. Varun sat opposite Malati, their knees

I

almost touching. Malati enjoyed the fun of this, but Varun was
so disconcerted that he looked desperately around at the
giraffes, and even stared attentively at the crowds of
schoolchildren, some of whom were licking huge bobbins of
pink spun candy. Aparna’s eyes began to shine with
anticipation.

Since Bhaskar was nine, and Aparna a third of his age, they
did not have much to say to each other. They attached
themselves to their most-favoured adults. Aparna, brought up
by her socialite parents with alternating indulgence and
irritation, found Lata reassuringly certain in her affection. In
Lata’s company she behaved in a less brat-like manner.
Bhaskar and Varun got on famously once Bhaskar succeeded
in getting him to concentrate. They discussed mathematics,
with special reference to racing odds.

They saw the elephant, the camel, the emu, the common bat,
the brown pelican, the red fox, and all the big cats. They even
saw a smaller one, the black-spotted leopard-cat, as he paced
frenziedly across the floor of his cage.

But the best stop of all was the reptile house. Both children
were eager to see the snake pit, which was full of fairly
sluggish pythons, and the glass cases with their deadly vipers
and kraits and cobras. And also, of course, the cold, corrugated
crocodiles onto whose backs some schoolchildren and visiting
villagers were throwing coins while others, as the white,
serrated mouths opened lazily far below, leaned over the

railings and pointed and squealed and shuddered. Luckily
Varun had a taste for the sinister, and took the kids inside. Lata
and Malati refused to go in.

‘I see enough horrifying things as a medical student,’ said
Malati.

‘I wish you wouldn’t tease Varun,’ said Lata after a while.

‘Oh, I wasn’t teasing him,’ said Malati. ‘Just listening to him
attentively. It’s good for him.’ She laughed.

‘Mm - you make him nervous.’

‘You’re very protective of your elder brother.’

‘He’s not - oh, I see - yes, my younger elder brother.

35Well, since I don’t have a younger brother, I suppose I’ve

given him the part. But seriously, Malati, I am worried

about him. And so is my mother. We don’t know what

he’s going to do when he graduates in a few months. He

hasn’t shown much aptitude for anything. And Arun bullies

him fearfully. I wish some nice girl would take him in

charge. ‘

‘And I’m not the one ? I must say, he has a certain feeble

charm. Heh, hehF Malati imitated Varun’s laugh. •;

‘Don’t be facetious, Malati. I don’t know about Varun, I

but my mother would have a fit,’ said Lata. ‘•

This was certainly true. Even though it was an impossible j

proposition geographically, the very thought of it would

have given Mrs Rupa Mehra nightmares. Malati Trivedi,

apart from being one of a small handful of girls among the t

almost five hundred boys at the Prince of Wales Medical I

College, was notorious for her outspoken views, her partici- |

pation in the activities of the Socialist Party, and her love [

affairs - though not with any of those five hundred boys, I

whom, by and large, she treated with contempt. I

‘Your mother likes me, I can tell,’ said Malati. I

‘That’s beside the point,’ said Lata. ‘And actually, I’m L

quite amazed that she does. She usually judges things by J

influences. I would have thought you’re a bad influence on 1

me.’ I

But this was not entirely true, even from Mrs Rupa I

Mehra’s viewpoint. Malati had certainly given Lata more 1

confidence than she had had when she had emerged wet- 1

feathered from St Sophia’s. And Malati had succeeded in I

getting Lata to enjoy Indian classical music, which (unlike I

ghazals) Mrs Rupa Mehra approved of. That they should I

have become room-mates at all was because the govern- I

ment medical college (usually referred to by its royal title) I

had no provision for housing its small contingent of women 1

and had persuaded the university to accommodate them in I

its hostels. JL

Malati was charming, dressed conservatively but attrac- V

tively, and could talk to Mrs Rupa Mehra about everything T

from religious fasts to cooking to genealogy, matters that I

36

Iher own westernized children showed very little interest in.
She was also fair, an enormous plus in Mrs Rupa Mehra’s
subconscious calculus. Mrs Rupa Mehra was convinced that
Malati Trivedi, with her dangerously attractive greenish eyes,
must have Kashmiri or Sindhi blood in her. So far, however,
she had not discovered any.

Though they did not often talk about it, the bond of paternal
loss also tied Lata and Malati together.

Malati had lost her adored father, a surgeon from Agra, when
she was eight. He had been a successful and handsome man
with a wide acquaintance and a varied history of work : he had
been attached to the army for a while and had gone to
Afghanistan ; he had taught in Lucknow at the medical
college; he had also been in private practice. At the time of his
death, although he had not been very good at saving money, he
had owned a fair amount of property - largely in the form of
houses. Every five years or so he would uproot himself and
move to another town in U.P. Meerut, Bareilly, Lucknow,
Agra. Wherever he lived he built a new house, but without
disposing of the old ones. When he died, Malati’s mother went
into what seemed like an irreversible depression, and remained
in that state for two years.

Then she pulled herself together. She had a large family to take
care of, and it was essential that she think of things in a
practical way. She was a very simple, idealistic, upright

woman, and she was concerned more with what was right than
with what was convenient or approved of or monetarily
beneficial. It was in that light that she was determined to bring
up her family.

And what a family! - almost all girls. The eldest was a proper
tomboy, sixteen years old when her father died, and already
married to a rural landlord’s son; she lived about twenty miles
away from Agra in a huge house with twenty servants, lichi
orchards, and endless fields, but even after her marriage she
joined her sisters in Agra for months at a time. This daughter
had been followed by two sons, but they had both died in
childhood, one aged five, the other three. The boys had been
followed by Malati herself,

37who was eight years younger than her sister. She also grew
up as a sort of boy - though not by any means like the tomboy
her sister was - for a variety of reasons conrifectec ‘ with her
infancy: the direct gaze in her unusual eyes, her boyish look,
the fact that the boys’ clothes were at handl the sadness that
her parents had experienced at the deatJil of their two sons.
After Malati came three girls, one after | another; then another
boy; and then her father died. I

Malati had therefore been brought up almost entirely v among
women ; even her little brother had been like a little sister; he
had been too young to be treated as anything different. (After a
while, perhaps out of perplexity, he had gone the way of his
brothers.) The girls grew up in an atmosphere where men
came to be seen as exploitative and threatening; many of the
men Malati came into contact j with were precisely that. No
one could touch the memory j of her father. Malati was
determined to become a doctor I like him, and never allowed
his instruments to rust. She I intended one day to use them. I

Who were these men ? One was the cousin who did them out
of many of the things that her father had collected and used,
but which were lying in storage after his death. Malati’s
mother had cleared out what she had seen as inessentials from
their life. It was not necessary now to have two kitchens, one
European and one Indian. The china and fine cutlery for
western food was put away, together with a great deal of
furniture, in a garage. The cousin came, got the keys from the
grieving widow, told her he would manage matters, and
cleaned out whatever had been stored. Malati’s mother never
saw a rupee of the proceeds. ‘Well,’ she had said
philosophically, ‘at least my sins have lessened.’

Another was the servant who acted as an intermediary for the
sale of the houses. He would contact property agents or other
prospective buyers in the towns where the houses were
located, and make deals with them. He had something of a
reputation as a cheat.

Yet another was her father’s younger brother, who still lived in
the Lucknow house, with his wife downstairs and

38a dancing girl upstairs. He would happily have cheated
them, if he had been able to, over the sale of that house. He
needed money to spend on the dancing girl.

Then there was the young - well, twenty-six-year-old but
rather sleazy college teacher who had lived downstairs in a
rented room when Malati was fifteen or so. Malati’s mother
wanted her to learn English, and had no compunction, no
matter what the neighbours said (and they said a great deal,
not much of it charitable) about sending Malati to learn from
him - though he was a bachelor. Perhaps in this case the
neighbours were right. He very soon fell madly in love with
Malati, and requested her mother for permission to marry her.

When Malati was asked by her mother for her views on the
matter, she was amazed and shocked, and refused point-blank.

At the medical college in Brahmpur, and before that, when she
had studied Intermediate Science in Agra, Malati had had a lot
to put up with : teasing, gossip, the pulling of the light chunni
around her neck, and remarks such as ‘She wants to be a boy.’
This was very far from the truth. The remarks were unbearable
and only diminished when, provoked by one boy beyond
endurance, she had slapped his face hard in front of his
friends.

Men fell for her at a rapid rate, but she saw them as beneath
her attention. It was not as if she truly hated men ; most of the
time she didn’t. It was just that her standards were too high.
No one came near the image she and her sisters had of their
father, and most men struck her as being immature. Besides,
marriage was a distraction for someone who had set her sights
upon the career of medicine, and she was not enormously
concerned if she never got married.

She over-filled the unforgiving minute. As a girl of twelve or
thirteen, she had been a loner, even in her crowded family. She
loved reading, and people knew better than to talk to her when
she had a book in her hands. When this happened, her mother
did not insist that she help with cooking and housework.
‘Malati’s reading,’ was enough for people to avoid the room
where she lay or sat

39crouched, for she would pounce angrily on anyone who
dared disturb her. Sometimes she would actually hide from
people, seeking out a corner where no one would be likfiy to
find her. They got the message soon enough. As the years
passed, she guided the education of her younger sisters. Her

elder sister, the tomboy, guided them all - or, rather, bossed
them around - in other matters.

Malati’s mother was remarkable in that she wished her
daughters to be independent. She wanted them, apart from
their schooling at a Hindi medium school, to learn music and
dancing and languages (and especially to be good at English) ;
and if this meant that they had to go to someone’s house to
learn what was needed, they would go - regardless of what
people said. If a tutor had to be called to the house of the six
women, he would be called. Young men would look up in
fascination at the first floor of the house, as they heard five
girls singing along undemurely together. If the girls wanted
ice-cream as a special treat, they would be allowed to go to the
shop by themselves and eat it. When neighbours objected to
the shamelessness of letting young girls go around by
themselves in Agra, they were allowed occasionally to go to
the shop after dark instead which, presumably, was worse,
though less detectable. Malati’s mother made it clear to the
girls that she would give them the best education possible, but
that they would have to find their own husbands. *

Soon after she came to Brahmpur, Malati fell in love ! with a
married musician, who was a socialist. She remained involved
with the Socialist Party even when their affair ended. Then she
had another rather unhappy love affair. I At the moment she
was unattached. |

Though full of energy most of the time, Malati would ‘ fall ill
every few months or so, and her mother would | come down
from Agra to Brahmpur to cure her of the evil i eye, an
influence that lay outside the province of western i medicine.
Because Malati had such remarkable eyes herself, ]\ she was a
special target of the evil eye.

A dirty, grey, pink-legged crane surveyed Malati and Lata with
its small, intense red eyes; then a grey filmblinked sideways
across each eyeball, and it walked carefully away.

‘Let’s surprise the kids by buying some of that spun candy for
them,’ said Lata as a vendor went past. ‘I wonder what’s
keeping them. What’s the matter, Malati? What are you
thinking of ?’

‘Love,’ said Malati.

‘Oh, love, what a boring subject,’ said Lata. Til never fall in
love. I know you do from time to time. But -‘ She lapsed into
silence, thinking once again, with some distaste, of Savita and
Pran, who had left for Simla. Presumably they would return
from the hills deeply in love. It was intolerable.

‘Well, sex then.’

‘Oh please, Malati,’ said Lata looking around quickly. ‘I’m not
interested in that either,’ she added, blushing.

‘Well, marriage then. I’m wondering whom you’ll get married
to. Your mother will get you married off within a year, I’m
sure of it. And like an obedient little mouse, you’ll obey her.’

‘Quite right,’ said Lata.

This rather annoyed Malati, who bent down and plucked three
narcissi growing immediately in front of a sign that read, Do
not pluck the flowers. One she kept, and two she handed to

Lata, who felt very awkward holding such illegally gotten
gains. Then Malati bought five sticks of flossy pink candy,
handed four to Lata to hold with her two narcissi, and began to
eat the fifth.

Lata started to laugh.

‘And what will happen then to your plan to teach in a small
school for poor children ?’ demanded Malati.

‘Look, here they come,’ said Lata.

Aparna was looking petrified and holding Varun’s hand tightly.
For a few minutes they all ate their candy, walking towards the
exit. At the turnstile a ragged urchin looked longingly at them,
and Lata quickly gave him a small coin. He had been on the
point of begging, but hadn’t yet done so, and looked
astonished.

One of her narcissi went into the horse’s mane. The

4itonga-wallah again began to sing of his shattered heart. This
time they all joined in. Passers-by turned their heads as the
tonga trotted past.

The crocodiles had had a liberating effect on Varun. But when
they got back to Fran’s house on the university campus, where
Arun and Meenakshi and Mrs Rupa Mehra were staying, he
had to face the consequences of returning an hour late.
Aparna’s mother and grandmother were looking anxious.

‘You damn irresponsible fool,’ said Arun, dressing him down
in front of everyone. ‘You, as the man, are in charge, and if
you say twelve-thirty, it had better be twelve-thirty, especially
since you have my daughter with you. And my sister. I don’t
want to hear any excuses. You damned idiot.’ He was furious.
‘And you -‘ he added to Lata, ‘you should have known better
than to let him lose track of the time. You know what he’s
like.’

Varun bowed his head and looked shiftily at his feet. He was
thinking how satisfying it would be to feed his elder brother,
head first, to the largest of the crocodiles.

1.12

ONE of the reasons why Lata was studying in Brahmpur was
because this was where her grandfather, Dr Kishen Chand
Seth, lived. He had promised his daughter Rupa when Lata
first came to study here that he would take very good care of
her. But this had never happened. Dr Kishen Chand Seth was
far too preoccupied either with bridge at the Subzipore Club or
feuds with the likes of the Minister of Revenue or passion for
his young wife Parvati to be capable of fulfilling any guardianlike role towards Lata. Since it was from his grandfather that
Arun had inherited his atrocious temper, perhaps this was, all
in all, not a bad thing. At any rate, Lata did not mind living in
the university dormitory. Far better for her studies, she
thought, than under the wing of her irascible Nana. Just after
Raghubir Mehra had died, Mrs Rupa Mehra

42-and her family had gone to live with her father, who at that
stage had not yet remarried. Given her straitened finances, this
seemed to be the only thing to do ; she also thought that he
might be lonely, and hoped to help him with his household
affairs. The experiment had lasted a few months, and had been

a disaster. Dr Kishen Chand Seth was an impossible man to
live with. Tiny though he was, he was a force to reckon with
not only at the medical college, from which he had retired as
Principal, but in Brahmpur at large : everyone was scared of
him and obeyed him tremblingly. He expected his home life to
run on similar lines. He overrode Rupa Mehra’s writ with
respect to her own children. He left home suddenly for weeks
on end without leaving money or instructions for the staff.
Finally, he accused his daughter, whose good looks had
survived her widowhood, of making eyes at his colleagues
when he invited them home - a shocking accusation for the
heartbroken though sociable Rupa.

The teenaged Arun had threatened to beat up his grandfather.
There had been tears and yells and Dr Kishen Chand Seth had
pounded the floor with his stick. Then Mrs Rupa Mehra had
left, weeping and determined, with her brood of four, and had
sought refuge with sympathetic friends in Darjeeling.

Reconciliation had been effected a year later in a renewed bout
of weeping. Since then things had jolted along. The marriage
with Parvati (which had shocked not just his family but
Brahmpur at large because of the disparity of age), Lata’s
enrolment at Brahmpur University, Savita’s engagement
(which Dr Kishen Chand Seth had helped arrange), Savita’s
wedding (which he had almost wrecked and from which he
had wilfully absented himself) : all these were landmarks
along an extremely bumpy road. But family was family, and,
as Mrs Rupa Mehra continually told herself, one had to take
the rough with the smooth.

Several months had now passed since Savita’s wedding.
Winter had gone and the pythons in the zoo had emerged from
hibernation. Roses had replaced narcissi, and had been
replaced in their turn by the purple-wreath creeper, whose
five-bladed flowers helicoptered gently to the ground

43in the hot breeze. The broad, silty-brown Ganga, flowing
due east past the ugly chimneys of the tannery and the marble
edifice of the Barsaat Mahal, past Old Brahmpur { with its
crowded bazaars and alleys, temples and mosques, past the
bathing ghats and the cremation ghat and the Brahmpur Fort,
past the whitewashed pillars of the Subzipore Club and the
spacious estate of the university, had shrunken with the
summer, but boats and steamers still plied busily up and down
its length, as did trains along the parallel railway line that
bounded Brahmpur to the south.

Lata had left the hostel and had gone to live with Savita and
Pran, who had descended from Simla to the plains very much
in love. Malati visited Lata often, and had grown to like the
lanky Pran, of whom she had formed such an unfavourable
first impression. Lata too liked his decent, affectionate ways,
and was not too upset to learn that Savita was pregnant. Mrs
Rupa Mehra wrote long letters to her daughters from Arun’s
flat in Calcutta, and complained repeatedly that no one replied
to her letters either soon enough or often enough.

Though she did not mention this in any of her letters for fear
of enraging her daughter, Mrs Rupa Mehra had tried - without
success - to find a match for Lata in Calcutta. Perhaps she had
not made enough effort, she told herself: she was, after all, still
recovering from the excitement and exertion of Savita’s
wedding. But now at last she was going back to Brahmpur for
a three-month stint at what she had begun to call her second
home: her daughter’s home, not her father’s. As the train
puffed along towards Brahmpur, the propitious city which had
yielded her one son-in-law already, Mrs Rupa Mehra promised
herself that she would make another attempt. Within a day or
two of her arrival she would go to her father for advice.

1.13

IN the event, it was not necessary to go to Dr Kishen Chand
Seth for advice. He drove to the university the next day in a
fury and arrived at Pran Kapoor’s house.

44»

It was three in the afternoon, and hot. Pran was at the
department. Lata was attending a lecture on the Metaphysical
Poets. Savita had gone shopping. Mansoor, the young servant,
tried to soothe Dr Kishen Chand Seth by offering him tea,
coffee or fresh lime juice. All this was brushed brusquely
aside.

‘Is anyone at home? Where is everyone?’ asked Dr Kishen
Chand Seth in a rage. His short, compressed and very jowly
appearance made him look a little like a fierce and wrinkled
Tibetan watchdog. (Mrs Rupa Mehra’s good looks had been
the gift of her mother.) He carried a carved Kashmiri cane
which he used more for emphasis than for support. Mansoor
hurried inside.

‘Burri Memsahib?’ he called, knocking at the door of Mrs
Rupa Mehra’s room.

‘What?… Who?’

‘Burri Memsahib, your father is here.’

‘Oh. Oh.’ Mrs Rupa Mehra, who had been enjoying an
afternoon nap, woke into a nightmare. ‘Tell him I will be with

him immediately, and offer him some tea.’

‘Yes, Memsahib.’

Mansoor entered the drawing room. Dr Seth was staring at an
ashtray.

‘Well ? Are you dumb as well as half-witted ?’ asked Dr
Kishen Chand Seth.

‘She’s just coming, Sahib.’

‘Who’s just coming ? Fool !’

‘Burri Memsahib, Sahib. She was resting.’

That Rupa, his mere chit of a daughter, could ever somehow
have been elevated into not just a Memsahib but a Burri
Memsahib puzzled and annoyed Dr Seth.

Mansoor said, ‘Will you have some tea, Sahib? Or coffee?’

‘Just now you offered me nimbu pani.’

‘Yes, Sahib.’

‘A glass of nimbu pani.’

‘Yes, Sahib. At once.’ Mansoor made to go.

‘And oh -‘

‘Yes, Sahib?’

45’Are there any arrowroot biscuits in this house ?’

‘I think so, Sahib.’

Mansoor went into the back garden to pluck a couple oft
limes, then returned to the kitchen to squeeze them into juice.

Dr Kishen Chand Seth picked up a day-old Statesman in
preference to that day’s Brahmpur Chronicle, and sat down to
read in an armchair. Everyone was half-witted in this house.

Mrs Rupa Mehra dressed hurriedly in a black and white cotton
sari and emerged from her room. She entered the drawing
room, and began to apologize.

‘Oh, stop it, stop it, stop all this nonsense,’ said Dr Kishen
Chand Seth impatiently in Hindi.

‘Yes, Baoji.’

‘After waiting for a week I decided to visit you. What kind of
daughter are you ?’

‘A week ?’ said Mrs Rupa Mehra palely.

‘Yes, yes, a week. You heard me, Burri Memsahib.’

Mrs Rupa Mehra didn’t know which was worse, her father’s
anger or his sarcasm.

‘But I only arrived from Calcutta yesterday.’

Her father seemed ready to explode at this patent fiction when
Mansoor came in with the nimbu pani and a plate of arrowroot
biscuits. He noticed the expression on Dr Seth’s face and stood
hesitantly by the door.

‘Yes, yes, put it down here, what are you waiting for?’

Mansoor set the tray down on a small glass-topped table and
turned to leave. Dr Seth took a sip and bellowed in fury-

‘Scoundrel !’

Mansoor turned, trembling. He was only sixteen, and was
standing in for his father, who had taken a short leave. None of
his teachers during his five years at a village school had
inspired in him such erratic terror as Burri Memsahib’s crazy
father.

‘You rogue - do you want to poison me ?’

‘No, Sahib.’

‘What have you given me ?’

46

\fc

‘Nimbu pani, Sahib.’

Dr Seth, jowls shaking, looked closely at Mansoor. Was he
trying to cheek him ?

‘Of course it’s nimbu pani. Did you think I thought it was
whisky ?’

‘Sahib.’ Mansoor was nonplussed.

‘What have you put in it ?’

‘Sugar, Sahib.’

‘You buffoon! I have my nimbu pani made with salt, not
sugar,’ roared Dr Kishen Chand Seth. ‘Sugar is poison for me.

I have diabetes, like your Burri Memsahib. How many times
have I told you that ?’

Mansoor was tempted to reply, ‘Never,’ but thought better of
it. Usually Dr Seth had tea, and he brought the milk and sugar
separately.

Dr Kishen Chand Seth rapped his stick on the floor. ‘Go. Why
are you staring at me like an owl ?’

‘Yes, Sahib. I’ll make another glass.’

‘Leave it. No. Yes - make another glass.’

‘With salt, Sahib.’ Mansoor ventured to smile. He had quite a
nice smile.

‘What are you laughing at like a donkey ?’ asked Dr Seth.
‘With salt, of course.’

‘Yes, Sahib.’

‘And, idiot -‘

‘Yes, Sahib?’

‘With pepper too.’

‘Yes, Sahib.’

Dr Kishen Chand Seth veered around towards his daughter.
She wilted before him.

‘What kind of daughter do I have ?’ he asked rhetorically.
Rupa Mehra waited for the answer, and it was not long in
coming. ‘Ungrateful!’ Her father bit into an arrowroot biscuit
for emphasis. ‘Soggy !’ he added in disgust.

Mrs Rupa Mehra knew better than to protest.

Dr Kishen Chand Seth went on :

‘You have been back from Calcutta for a week and you
haven’t visited me once. Is it me you hate so much or your
stepmother ?’

47Since her stepmother, Parvati, was considerably younger j
than herself, Mrs Rupa Mehra found it very difficult to , think
of her other than as her father’s nurse and, later, mistress.
Though fastidious, Mrs Rupa Mehra did not entirely resent
Parvati. Her father had been lonely for three decades after her
mother had died. Parvati was good to him and (she supposed)
good for him. Anyway, thought Mrs Rupa Mehra, this is the
way things happen in the « world. It is best to be on good
terms with everyone.

‘But I only arrived here yesterday,’ she said. She had told him
so a minute ago, but he evidently did not believe ‘

her.

‘Hunh!’ said Dr Seth dismissively.

‘By the Brahmpur Mail.’

‘You wrote in your letter that you would be coming last

week.’

‘But I couldn’t get reservations, Baoji, so I decided to stay in
Calcutta another week.’ This was true, but the pleasure of
spending time with her three-year-old granddaughter Aparna
had also been a factor in her delay.

‘Have you heard of telegrams ?’

‘I thought of sending you one, Baoji, but I didn’t think it was
so important. Then, the expense….’

‘Ever since you became a Mehra you have become completely
evasive.’

This was an unkind cut, and could not fail to wound. Mrs
Rupa Mehra bowed her head.

‘Here. Have a biscuit,’ said her father in a conciliatory

manner.

Mrs Rupa Mehra shook her head.

‘Eat, fool!’ said her father with rough affection. ‘Or are you
still keeping those brainless fasts that are so bad for

your health ?’

‘It is Ekadashi today.’ Mrs Rupa Mehra fasted on the eleventh
day of each lunar fortnight in memory of her

husband.

‘I don’t care if it’s ten Ekadashis,’ said her father with some
heat. ‘Ever since you came under the influence of the Mehras
you have become as religious as your ill-fated

48mother. There have been too many mismatched marriages in
this family.’

The combination of these two sentences, loosely coupled in
several possible wounding interpretations, was too much for
Mrs Rupa Mehra. Her nose began to redden. Her husband’s
family was no more religious than it was evasive. Raghubir’s
brothers and sisters had taken her to their heart in a manner
both affecting and comforting to a sixteenyear-old bride, and
still, eight years after her husband’s death, she visited as many
of them as possible in the course of what her children called

her Annual Trans-India RailPilgrimage. If she was growing to
be ‘as religious as her mother’ (which she was not - at least
not yet), the operative influence was probably the obvious one:
that of her mother, who had died in the post-First-World-War
influenza epidemic, when Rupa was very young. A faded
image now came before her eyes: the soft spirit of Dr Kishen
Chand Seth’s first wife could not have been more distant from
his own freethinking, allopathic soul. His comment about
mismatched marriages injured the memory of two loved
ghosts, and was possibly even intended as an insult to the
asthmatic Pran.

‘Oh don’t be so sensitive!’ said Dr Kishen Chand Seth
brutally. Most women, he had decided, spent two-thirds of
their time weeping and whimpering. What good did they think
it did ? As an afterthought he added, ‘You should get Lata
married off soon.’

Mrs Rupa Mehra’s head jerked up. ‘Oh? Do you think so?’ she
said. Her father seemed even more full of surprises than usual.

‘Yes. She must be nearly twenty. Far too late. Parvati got
married when she was in her thirties, and see what she got. A
suitable boy must be found for Lata.’

‘Yes, yes, 1 was just thinking the same,’ said Mrs Rupa
Mehra. ‘But I don’t know what Lata will say.’

Dr Kishen Chand Seth frowned at this irrelevance.

‘And where will 1 find a suitable boy?’ she continued ‘We
were lucky with Savita.’

‘Lucky - nothing! 1 made the introduction. Is she preg

I

49nant? No one tells me anything,’ said Dr Kishen Chand
Seth. 1

‘Yes, Baoji.’ •

Dr Seth paused to interpret the yes. Then he said: ‘It’s | about
time. I hope I get a great-grandson this time.’ He f paused
again. ‘How is she ?’ A

‘Well, a bit of morning sickness,’ began Mrs Rupa I Mehra. »

‘No, idiot, I mean my great-granddaughter, Arun’s , child,’
said Dr Kishen Chand Seth impatiently. !

‘Oh, Aparna ? She’s very sweet. She’s grown very at- ‘\ tached
to me,’ said Mrs Rupa Mehra happily. ‘Arun and ? Meenakshi
send their love.’ j

This seemed to satisfy Dr Seth for the moment, and he ! bit his
arrowroot biscuit carefully. ‘Soft,’ he complained. 1 ‘Soft.’ •

Things had to be just so for her father, Mrs Rupa Mehra knew.
When she was a child she had not been allowed to drink water
with her meals. Each morsel had to be chewed twenty-four

times to aid digestion. For a man so particular about, indeed so
fond of, his food, it was sad to see him reduced to biscuits and
boiled eggs.

‘I’ll see what I can do for Lata,’ her father went on. ‘There’s a
young radiologist at the Prince of Wales. I can’t remember his,
name. If we had thought about it earlier and used our
imaginations we could have captured Fran’s younger brother
and had a double wedding. But now they say he’s got engaged
to that Banaras girl. Perhaps that is just as well,’ he added,
remembering that he was supposed to be feuding with the
Minister.

‘But you can’t go now, Baoji. Everyone will be back soon,’
protested Mrs Rupa Mehra.

‘Can’t? Can’t? Where is everyone when I want them?’ retorted
Dr Kishen Chand Seth. He clicked his tongue impatiently.
‘Don’t forget your stepmother’s birthday next week,’ he added
as he walked to the door.

Mrs Rupa Mehra looked wistfully and worriedly from the
doorway at her father’s back. On the way to his car he paused
by a bed of red and yellow cannas in Fran’s front

5°garden, and she noticed him get more and more agitated.
Bureaucratic flowers (among which he also classified
marigolds, bougainvillaea and petunias) infuriated him. He
had banned them at the Prince of Wales Medical College as
long as he had wielded supreme power there; now they were
making a comeback. With one swipe of his Kashmiri walkingstick he lopped off the head of a yellow canna. As his daughter
tremblingly watched, he got into his ancient grey Buick. This
noble machine, a Raja among the rabble of Austins and

Morrises that plied the Indian roads, was still slightly dented
from the time when, ten years ago, Arun (on a visit during his
vacation from St George’s) had taken it for a catastrophic
joyride. Arun was the only one in the family who could defy
his grandfather and get away with it, indeed was loved the
more for it. As Dr Kishen Chand Seth drove off, he told
himself that this had been a satisfying visit. It had given him
something to think about, something to plan.

Mrs Rupa Mehra took a few moments to recover from her
father’s bracing company. Suddenly realizing how hungry she
was, she began to think of her sunset meal. She could not
break her fast with grain, so young Mansoor was dispatched to
the market to buy some raw bananas to make into cutlets. As
he went through the kitchen to get the bicycle key and the
shopping bag, he passed by the counter, and noticed the
rejected glass of nimbu pani: cool, sour, inviting.

He swiftly gulped it down.

1.14

EVERYONE who knew Mrs Rupa Mehra knew how much she
loved roses and, particularly, pictures of roses, and therefore
most of the birthday cards she received featured roses of
various colours and sizes, and various degrees of copiousness
and blatancy. This afternoon, sitting with her reading-glasses
on at the desk in the room she shared with Lata, she was going
through old cards for a practicalpurpose, although the project
threatened to overwhelm her with its resonances of ancient
sentiment. Red roses, yellow roses, even a blue rose here and
there combined themselves with ribbons, pictures of kittens
and one of a guilty-looking puppy. Apples and grapes and
roses in a basket ; sheep in a field with a foreground of roses ;
roses in a misty pewter mug with a bowl of strawberries

resting nearby; violetflushed roses graced with unrose-like,
unserrated leaves and mild, even inviting, green thorns :
birthday cards from family, friends and assorted well-wishers
all over India, and even some from abroad - everything
reminded her of everything, as her elder son was apt to
remark.

Mrs Rupa Mehra glanced in a cursory manner over her piles of
old New Year cards before returning to the birthday roses. She
took out a small pair of scissors from the recesses of her great
black handbag, and tried to decide which card she would have
to sacrifice. It was very rarely that Mrs Rupa Mehra bought a
card for anyone, no matter how close or dear the person was.
The habit of necessary thrift had sunk deep into her mind, but
eight years of the deprivation of small luxuries could not
reduce for her the sanctity of the birthday greeting. She could
not afford cards, so she made them. In fact she enjoyed the
creative challenge of making them. Scraps of cardboard,
shreds of ribbon, lengths of coloured paper, little silver stars
and adhesive golden numerals lay in a variegated trove at the
bottom of the largest of her three suitcases, and these were
now pressed into service. The scissors poised, descended.
Three silver stars were parted from their fellows and pasted
(with the help of borrowed glue - this was the only constituent
Mrs Rupa Mehra did not, for fear of leakage, carry with her)
onto three corners of the front of the folded blank white piece
of cardboard. The fourth corner, the northwest corner, could
contain two golden numerals indicating the age of the
recipient.

But now Mrs Rupa Mehra paused - for surely the age of the
recipient would be an ambivalent detail in the present case.
Her stepmother, as she could never cease to remember, was
fully ten years younger than she was, and the

5iaccusing ‘35’, even - or perhaps especially - in gold, could
be seen - would be seen - as implying an unacceptable
disparity, possibly even an unacceptable motivation. The
golden numerals were put aside, and a fourth silver star joined
its fellows in a pattern of innocuous symmetry.

Postponing the decision of illustration, Mrs Rupa Mehra now
looked for assistance in building up a rhyming text for her
card. The rose-and-pewter card contained the following lines :

May the gladness you have scattered

Along life’s shining way And the little deeds of kindness

That are yours from day to day And the happiness you’ve
showered

On others all life through Return to swell your blessings

In this birthday hour for you.

This would not do for Parvati, Mrs Rupa Mehra decided. She
turned to the card illustrated with grapes and apples.

‘Tis a day for hugs and kisses,

For cakes and candles too, A day for all who love you

To renew their love anew, A day for sveet reflection

Along life’s shining way, And a day for all to tell you :

Have the wonderfullest day.

This showed promise but there was something wrong with the
fourth line, Mrs Rupa Mehra instinctively felt. Also, she
would have to alter ‘hugs and kisses’ to ‘special greetings’ ;
Parvati might very well deserve hugs and kisses but Mrs Rupa
Mehra was incapable of giving them to her.

Who had sent her this card ? Queenie and Pussy Kapadia, two
unmarried sisters in their forties whom she had not met for
years. Unmarried ! The very word was like a knell.

53Mrs Rupa Mehra paused in her thoughts for a moment, and
moved resolutely on.

The puppy yapped an unrhymed and therefore unusable text a mere ‘Happy Birthday and Many Happy Returns’

- but the sheep bleated in rhymes identical to, but sentiment
marginally distinct from, the others:

It’s not a standard greeting

For just one joyful day But a wish that’s meant to cover

Life’s bright and shining way To wish you all the special
things

That mean the most to you So that this year and every year

Your fondest dreams come true.

Yes! Life’s shining way, a concept dear to Mrs Rupa Mehra,
was here polished to an even finer lustre. Nor did the lines
commit her to any deep protestation of affection for her
father’s second wife. At the same time the greeting was not
accusably distant. She got out her black and gold Mont Blanc
fountain pen, Raghubir’s present to her when Arun was born twenty-five years old and still going strong, she reflected with
a sad smile - and began to write.

Mrs Rupa Mehra’s handwriting was very small and wellformed, and this presented her in the present instance with a
problem. She had chosen too large a size of card in proportion
to her affection, but the silver stars had been stuck and it was
too late to change that parameter. She now wished to fill as
much space as possible with the rhymed message so that she
would not have to inscribe more than a few words in her own
right to supplement the verse. The first three couplets were
therefore laid out with as much white space in between as
would not appear too obvious - on the left hand side; an
ellipsis of seven dots spoored across the page in a semblance
of suspense; and the concluding couplet was allowed to crash
down with thunderous blandness on the right.

‘To dear Parvati - a very happy birthday, much love,

54I

Rupa,’ wrote Mrs Rupa Mehra with a dutiful expression.
Then, repenting, she added ‘est’ to the ‘Dear’. It looked a little
cramped now, but only a careful eye would perceive it as an
afterthought.

Now came the heartbreaking part : not the mere transcription
of a stanza but the actual sacrifice of an old card. Which of the
roses would have to be transplanted ? After some thought, Mrs
Rupa Mehra decided that she could not bear to part with any
of them. The dog, then? He looked mournful, even guilty besides, the picture of a dog, however appealing his
appearance, was open to misinterpretation. The sheep perhaps
- yes, they would do. They were fluffy and unemotional. She
did not mind parting with them. Mrs Rupa Mehra was a
vegetarian, whereas both her father and Parvati were avid
meat-eaters. The roses in the foreground of the old card were
preserved for future use, and the three sheared sheep were
driven carefully towards new pastures.

Before she sealed the envelope Mrs Rupa Mehra got out a
small writing pad, and wrote a few lines to her father :

Dearest Baoji,

Words cannot express how much happiness it gave me to see
you yesterday. Pran and Savita and Lata were very
disappointed. They did not get the chance to be there, but such
is life. About the radiologist, or any other prospect for Lata,
please pursue enquiries. A good khatri boy would be best of
course, but after Arun’s marriage I am capable of considering
others. Fair or dark, as you know, one cannot be choosy. I have
recovered from my journey and remain, with much affection,

Your everloving daughter, -, Rupa

The house was quiet. She asked Mansoor for a cup of tea, and
decided to write a letter to Arun. She unfolded a green inland
letter form, dated it carefully in her minute and lucid script,
and began.

55My darling Arun,

I hope you are feeling much better and the pain in your back as
well as the toothache is much less. I was very sad and upset in
Calcutta as we did not have much time to spend at the station
together due to the traffic on Strand and Howrah Bridge and
you having to leave before the train left because Meenakshi
wanted you home early. You don’t know how very much you
are in my thoughts - much more than words can say. I thought
maybe the preparations for the party could have been
postponed by ten minutes but it was not to be. Meenakshi
knows best. Anyway whatever it all was the net result was that
we didn’t have long at the station and tears rolled down my
cheeks due to disappointment. My dear Varun also had to go
back because he came in your car to see me off. Such is life
one doesn’t often get the things one wants. Now I only pray
for you to get well soon and keep good health wherever you
are and have no more trouble with your back so that you can
play golf again which you are so fond of. If it be God’s will we
will meet again very soon. I love you lots and wish you all the
happiness and success you well deserve. Your Daddy would
have been so proud to see you in Bentsen and Pryce, and now
with wife and child. Love and kisses to darling Aparna.

The journey passed peacefully and as planned, but I must
admit I could not resist having some mihidana at Burdwan. If
you had been there you would have scolded me, but I could
not resist my sweet tooth. The ladies in my Ladies’ Reserve

compartment were very friendly and we played rummy and
three-two-five and had a good chat. One of the ladies knew the
Miss Pal we used to visit in Darjeeling, the one who was
engaged to the army captain but he died in the War. I had the
set of cards that Varun gave me for my last birthday in my bag,
and they helped to while away the journey. Whenever I travel I
remember our saloon days with your Daddy. Please give him
my love and tell him to study hard in the i good traditions of
his father.

56r

Savita is looking very well, and Pran is a first-class husband
except for his asthma and most caring. I think that he is having
some difficulty with his department but he does not like to talk
about it. Your grandfather visited yesterday and could have
given him some medical advice but unfortunately only I was at
home. By the way it is the birthday of your step-grandmother
next week, and maybe you should send her a card. Better late
than sorry.

I am suffering some pain in my foot but that is expected.
Monsoons will be here in two three months and then my joints
will play up. Unfortunately Pran cannot afford a car on his
lecturer’s salary and the transport situation is not good. I take a
bus or tonga to go here and there and sometimes I walk. As
you know, the Ganges is not far from the house and Lata also
goes walking quite a lot, she seems to enjoy it. It is quite safe
as far as the dhobi-ghat near the university, though there is a
bit of a monkey menace.

Has Meenakshi had Daddy’s gold medals set yet? I like the
idea of a neck-pendant for one and the lid of a little
cardamom-container for the other. That way you can read what
is written on both sides of the medal.

Now Arun mine, do not be cross with me for what I am
saying, but I have been thinking a lot about Lata lately, and I
think you should build up her confidence which she is lacking
despite her brilliant record of studies. She is quite afraid of
your comments, sometimes even I am afraid of them. I know
you do not mean to be harsh, but she is a sensitive girl and
now that she is of marriageable age she is super-sensitive. I am
going to write to Mr Gaur’s daughter Kalpana in Delhi - she
knows everyone, and may help us find a suitable match for
Lata. Also I think it is time for you to help in the matter. I
could see how busy you were with work, so I mentioned it
very rarely when I was in Calcutta but it was always on my
mind. Another covenanted boy from a good family, does not
have to be khatri, would be a dream come true. Now that the
college year is almost

57over Lata will have time. I may have many faults but I think
I am a loving mother, and I long to see all my children well
settled.

Soon it will be April and I am afraid I will again be very
depressed and lonely at heart because that month will bring
back memories of your father’s illness and death as if they
happened only the other day and it is eight long years that
have gone by and so much has happened under the bridge in
this period. I know there are thousands who have had and are
having much more to suffer but to every human being one’s
own sufferings seem the most and I am still very much human
and have not risen very much above the usual feelings of
sorrow and disappointments. I am trying very hard though
believe me to rise above all this, and (D.V.) I will.

Here the inland letter form ended, and Mrs Rupa Mehra began
to fill in - transversely - the space left blank near the head of
the letter :

Anyway space is short so my darling Arun I will end now. Do
not worry at all about me, my blood sugar level is OK I am
sure, Pran is making me go for a test at the university clinic
tomorrow morning, and I have been careful about my diet
except for one glass of very sweet nimbu pani when I arrived
tired after my journey.

Here she went on to write on the non-adhesive flap :

After I have written to Kalpana I will play a game of patience
with Varun’s cards. Lots and lots of love to you and to Varun
and a big hug and lots of kisses to my little sweetheart Aparna,
and of course to Meenakshi also.

Yours everloving, Ma

Fearing that her pen might run out during the course of her
next letter, Mrs Rupa Mehra opened her handbag and

58

*

took out an already opened bottle of ink - Parker’s Quink
Royal Washable Blue - effectively separated from the other
contents of the handbag by several layers of rags and
cellophane. A bottle of glue she habitually carried had once
leaked from its slit rubber cap with disastrous consequences,
and glue had thenceforth been banished from her handbag, but
ink had so far caused her only minor problems.

Mrs Rupa Mehra took out another inland letter form, then
decided that this would be a false economy in the present case,
and began writing on a well-husbanded pad of cream-coloured
cambric bond :

Dearest Kalpana,

You have always been like a daughter to me so I will speak
from the heart. You know how worried I have been about Lata
this last year or so. As you know, since your Uncle Raghubir
died I have had a hard time in many ways, and your father who was so close to Uncle during his lifetime - has been as
good to me after his sad demise. Whenever I come to Delhi
which is sadly not often of late I feel happy when I am with
you, despite the jackals that bark all night behind your house,
and since your dear mother passed away I have felt like a
mother to you.

Now the time has come to get Lata well settled, and I must
look all out for a suitable boy. Arun should shoulder some
responsibility in the matter but you know how it is, he is so
occupied with work and family. Varun is too young to help and
is quite unsteady also. You my dear Kalpana are a few years
older to Lata and I hope you can suggest some suitable names
among your old college friends or others in Delhi. Maybe in
October in the Divali holidays - or in December in the
ChristmasNew Year holidays - Lata and I can come to Delhi to
look into things? I only mention this to mention it. Do please
say what you think ?

How is your dear father ? I am writing from Brahmpur where I
am staying with Savita and Pran. All is well but

59the heat is already very delapidating and I am dreading
April-May-June. I wish you could have come to their wedding
but what with Pimmy’s appendix operation I % can
understand. I was worried to know she had not been well. I
hope it is all resolved now. I am in good health and my blood
sugar is fine. I have taken your J advice and had new glasses
made and can read and|H write without strain. •

Please write soonest to this address. I will be here • throughout
March and April, maybe even in May till I Lata’s results for
this year are out. jB

With fondest love, H

Yours ever, V

Ma (Mrs Rupa Mehra) m

p.s. Lata sometimes comes up with the idea that she • will not
get married. I hope you will cure her of such *| theories. I
know how you feel about early marriage after what happened
with your engagement, but in a different way I also feel that
‘tis better to have loved and lost etc. Not that love is always an
unmixed blessing.

p.s. Divali would be better than New Year for us to come to
Delhi, because it fits in better with my annual travel plans, but
whichever time you say is fine.

Lovingly, Ma

Mrs Rupa Mehra looked over her letter (and her signature she insisted on all young people calling her Ma), folded it
neatly in four, and sealed it in a matching envelope. She fished
out a stamp from her bag, licked it thoughtfully, stuck it on the
envelope, and wrote Kalpana’s address (from memory) as well
as Fran’s address on the back. Then she closed her eyes and sat
perfectly still for a few minutes. It was a warm afternoon.
After a while she took out the pack of playing cards from her
bag. When Mansoor came in to take away the tea and to do the
accounts, he found she had dozed off over a game of patience.

I

4

601.15

THE IMPERIAL BOOK DEPOT was one of the two best
bookshops in town, and was located on Nabiganj, the
fashionable street that was the last bulwark of modernity
before the labyrinthine alleys and ancient, cluttered
neighbourhoods of Old Brahmpur. Though it was a couple of
miles away from the university proper it had a greater
following among students and teachers than the University and
Allied Bookshop, which was just a few minutes away from
campus. The Imperial Book Depot was run by two brothers,
Yashwant and Balwant, both almost illiterate in English, but
both (despite their prosperous roundness) so energetic and
entrepreneurial that it apparently made no difference. They
had the best stock in town, and were extremely helpful to their
customers. If a book was not available in the shop, they asked
the customer himself to write down its name on the
appropriate order form.

Twice a week an impoverished university student was paid to
sort new arrivals onto the designated shelves. And since the
bookshop prided itself on its academic as well as general
stock, the proprietors unashamedly collared university teachers
who wandered in to browse, sat them down with a cup of tea
and a couple of publishers’ lists, and made them tick off titles
that they thought the bookshop should consider ordering.
These teachers were happy to ensure that books they needed
for their courses would be readily available to their students.
Many of them resented the University and Allied Bookshop
for its entrenched, lethargic, unresponsive and high-handed
ways.

After classes, Lata and Malati, both dressed casually in their
usual salwaar-kameez, went to Nabiganj to wander around and
have a cup of coffee at the Blue Danube coffee house. This
activity, known to university students as ‘ganjing’, they could
afford to indulge in about once a week. As they passed the
Imperial Book Depot, they were drawn magnetically in. Each
wandered off to her favourite shelves and subjects. Malati
headed straight for the novels, Lata went for poetry. On the
way, however, she paused by the

61f

science shelves, not because she understood much science,
but, rather, because she did not. Whenever she opened a
scientific book and saw whole paragraphs of incomprehensible
words and symbols, she felt a sense of wonder at the great
territories of learning that lay beyond her - the sum of so many
noble and purposive attempts to make objective sense of the
world. She enjoyed the feeling; it suited her serious moods;
and this afternoon she was feeling serious. She picked up a
random book and read a random paragraph :

It follows from De Moivre’s formula that z” = m (cos n + i sin
n). Thus, if we allow complex number z to describe a circle of
radius r about the origin, z“ will describe n complete times a
circle of radius m as z describes its circle once. We also recall
that r, the modulus of z, written |z|, gives the distance of z from
O, and that if z’ = x’ + iy’, then |z - z’ is the distance between
z and z’. With these preliminaries we may proceed to the proof
of the theorem.

What exactly it was that pleased her in these sentences she did
not know, but they conveyed weight, comfort, inevitability.
Her mind strayed to Varun and his mathematical studies. She
hoped that her brief words to him the day after the wedding
had done him some good. She should have written to him
more often to bolster his courage, but with exams coming up
she had very little time for anything. It was at the insistence of
Malati - who was even busiet than she was - that she had gone
ganjing at all.

She read the paragraph again, looking serious. ‘We also recall’
and ‘with these preliminaries’ drew her into a cornpact with
the author of these verities and mysteries. The words were
assured, and therefore reassuring: things were what they were
even in this uncertain world, and she could proceed from
there.

She smiled to herself now, not aware of her surroundings. Still
holding the book, she looked up. And this was how a young
man, who had been standing not far from

62her, was included, unintentionally, in her smile. He was
pleasantly startled, and smiled back at her. Lata frowned at
him and looked down at the page again. But she could not
concentrate on it, and after a few moments, replaced it on the
shelf before making her way to Poetry.

Lata, whatever she thought of love itself, liked love poetry.
‘Maud’ was one of her favourite poems. She began to flip
through a volume of Tennyson.

The tall young man, who had (Lata noticed) slightly wavy
black hair and very good, rather aquiline, looks, seemed to be
as interested in poetry as in mathematics, because a few
minutes later Lata was aware that he had shifted his attention
to the poetry shelves, and was glancing through the
anthologies. Lata felt that his eyes were on her from time to
time. This annoyed her and she did not look up. When, despite
herself, she did, she noticed him innocently immersed in his
reading. She could not resist glancing at the cover of his book.
It was a Penguin : Contemporary Verse. He now looked up,
and the tables were turned. Before she could glance down
again, he said : ‘It’s unusual for someone to be interested in
both poetry and mathematics.’

‘Is that so ?’ said Lata severely.

‘Courant and Robbins - it’s an excellent work.’

‘Oh ?’ said Lata. Then, realizing that the young man was
referring to the mathematics book she had picked randomly off
the shelf, she said, ‘Is it?’ by way of closure.

But the young man was eager to continue the conversation.

‘My father says so,’ he went on. ‘Not as a text but as a broad
introduction to various, well, facets of the subject. He teaches
maths at the university.’

Lata looked around to see if Malati was listening. But Malati
was intent on her browsing in the front of the shop. Nor was
anyone else eavesdropping; the shop was not busy at this time
of year - or this time of day.

‘Actually, I’m not interested in mathematics,’ said Lata with
an air of finality. The young man looked a littledowncast
before he rallied and confided, genially: ‘You know, nor am I.
I’m a history student myself.’

Lata was amazed at his determination and, looking straight at
him, said, ‘I must go now. My friend is waiting for me.’ Even
as she was saying this, however, she could not help noticing
how sensitive, even vulnerable, this wavy-haired young man
looked. This appeared to contradict his determined, bold
behaviour in speaking to an unknown, unintroduced, girl in a
bookshop.

‘I’m sorry, I suppose I’ve been disturbing you ?’ he
apologized, as if reading her thoughts.

‘No,’ said Lata. She was about to go to the front of the shop
when he added quickly, with a nervous smile, ‘In that case,
may I ask you your name ?’

‘Lata,’ said Lata shortly, though she didn’t see the logic of ‘in
that case’.

‘Aren’t you going to ask me mine?’ asked the young man, his
smile broadening amiably.

‘No,’ said Lata, quite kindly, and rejoined Malati, who had a
couple of paperback novels in her hand.

‘Who’s he ?’ whispered Malati conspiratorially.

‘Just someone,’ said Lata, glancing back a bit anxiously. ‘I
don’t know. He just came up to me and began a conversation.
Hurry up. Let’s go. I’m feeling hungry. And thirsty. It’s hot in
here.’

The man at the counter was looking at Lata and Malati with
the energetic friendliness he showered on regular customers.
The little finger of his left hand was searching for wax in the
crevices of his ear. He shook his head with reproving
benevolence and said in Hindi to Malati:

‘Exams are coming up, Malatiji, and you are still buying
novels ? Twelve annas plus one rupee four annas makes two
rupees altogether. I should not allow this. You are like
daughters to me.’

‘Balwantji, you would go out of business if we did not read
your novels. We are sacrificing our examination results at the
altar of your prosperity,’ said Malati.

‘I’m not,’ said Lata. The young man must have disap-

64peared behind a bookshelf, because she couldn’t see him
anywhere.

‘Good girl, good girl,’ said Balwant, possibly referring to both
of them.

‘Actually, we were going to get some coffee and came into
your shop unplanned,’ said Malati, ‘so I didn’t bring - ‘ She
left the sentence unfinished and flung a winning smile at
Balwant.

‘No, no, that is not necessary - you can give it later,’ said
Balwant. He and his brother extended terms of easy credit to
many students. When asked whether this wasn’t bad for
business, they would reply that they had never lost money
trusting anyone who bought books. And, certainly, they were
doing very well for themselves. They reminded Lata of the
priests of a well-endowed temple. The reverence with which
the brothers treated their books supported the analogy.

‘Since you suddenly feel famished, we are going straight to the
Blue Danube,’ said Malati decisively once they were outside
the shop. ‘And there you will tell me exactly what happened
between that Cad and you.’

‘Nothing,’ said Lata.

‘Hah!’ said Malati in affectionate scorn. ‘So what did you two
talk about ?’

‘Nothing,’ said Lata. ‘Seriously, Malati, he just came up and
started talking nonsense, and I said nothing in reply. Or
monosyllables. Don’t add chillies to boiled potatoes.’

They continued to stroll down Nabiganj.

‘Quite tall,’ said Malati, a couple of minutes later.

Lata said nothing.

‘Not exactly dark,’ said Malati.

Lata did not think this was worth responding to either. ‘Dark’,
as she understood it, referred in novels to hair, not skin.

‘But very handsome,’ persisted Malati.

Lata made a wry face at her friend, but she was, to her own
surprise, quite enjoying her description.

‘What’s his name ?’ continued Malati.

65’I don’t know,’ said Lata, looking at herself in the glass
front of a shoe shop.

Malati was astonished at Lata’s ineptness. ‘You talked to him
for fifteen minutes and you don’t know his name ?’

‘We did not talk for fifteen minutes,’ said Lata. ‘And I hardly
talked at all. If you’re so keen on him, why don’t you go back
to the Imperial Book Depot and ask him his name ? Like you,
he has no compunctions about talking to anyone.’ ]

‘So you don’t like him ?’ 1

Lata was silent. Then she said, ‘No, I don’t. I’ve noJ reason to
like him.’ 1

‘It’s not all that easy for men to talk to us, you know,1! said
Malati. ‘We shouldn’t be so hard on them.’ ‘

‘Malati defending the weaker sex!’ said Lata. ‘I never thought
I’d see the day.’

‘Don’t change the subject,’ said Malati. ‘He didn’t seem the
brazen type. I know. Trust my five-hundredfold experience.’

Lata flushed. ‘It seemed pretty easy for him to talk to me,’ she
said. ‘As if I was the sort of girl who …’

‘Who what?’

‘Who can be talked to,’ ended Lata uncertainly. Visions of her
mother’s disapproval floated across her mind. She made an
cfîuru ro push these away.

‘Well,’ said Malati, a little more quietly than usual as they
entered the Blue Danube, ‘he really does have nice looks.’

They sat down.

‘Nice hair,’ continued Malati, surveying the menu.

‘Let’s order,’ said Lata. Malati appeared to be in love with the
word ‘nice’.

They ordered coffee and pastries.

‘Nice eyes,’ said Malati, five minutes later, laughing now at
Lata’s studied unresponsiveness.

Lata remembered the young man’s temporary nervousness
when she had looked straight at him.

‘Yes,’ she agreed. ‘But so what? I have nice eyes too, and one
pair is enough.’

661.16

WHILE his mother-in-law was playing patience and his sisterin-law was fending off Malati’s leading questions, Dr Pran
Kapoor, that first-class husband and son-in-law, was battling
with the departmental problems he was reticent about
burdening his family with.

Pran, though a calm man by and large, and a kind man,
regarded the head of the English Department, Professor
Mishra, with a loathing that made him almost ill. Professor
O.P. Mishra was a huge, pale, oily hulk, political and
manipulative to the very depths of his being. The four
members of the syllabus committee of the English Department
were seated this afternoon around an oval table in the staff

room. It was an unusually warm day. The single window was
open (to the view of a dusty laburnum tree), but there was no
breeze; everyone looked uncomfortable, but Professor Mishra
was sweating in profuse drops that gathered on his forehead,
wet his thin eyebrows, and trickled down the sides of his large
nose. His lips were sweetly pursed and he was saying in his
genial, high-pitched voice, ‘Dr Kapoor, your point is well
taken, but I think that we will need a little convincing.’

The point was the inclusion of James Joyce on the syllabus for
the paper on Modern British Literature. Pran Kapoor had been
pressing this on the syllabus committee for two terms - ever
since he had been appointed a member - and at last the
committee had decided to agree whether to consider it.

Why, Pran wondered, did he dislike Professor Mishra so
intensely ? Although Pran had been appointed to his
lectureship five years ago under the headship of his
predecessor, Professor Mishra, as a senior member of the
department, must have had a say in hiring him. When he first
came to the department, Professor Mishra had gone out of his
way to be gracious to him, even inviting him to tea at his
house. Mrs Mishra was a small, busy, worried woman, and
Pran had liked her. But despite Professor Mishra’s open-armed
avuncularity, his Falstaffian bulk and charm,

67Pran detected something dangerous: his wife and two young
sons were, so it seemed to him, afraid of their father.

Pran had never been able to understand why people loved
power, but he accepted it as a fact of life. His own father, for
instance, was greatly attracted by it : his enjoyment in its
exercise went beyond the pleasure of being able to realize his
ideological principles. Mahesh Kapoor enjoyed being Revenue
Minister, and he would probably be happy to become either

Chief Minister of Purva Pradesh or a Minister in Prime
Minister Nehru’s Cabinet in Delhi. The headaches, the
overwork, the responsibility, the lack of control over one’s
own time, the complete absence of opportunity to contemplate
the world from a calm vantage point: these mattered little to
him. Perhaps it was true to say that Mahesh Kapoor had
contemplated the world sufficiently long from the calm
vantage point of his cell in a prison in British India, and now
required what he had in fact acquired: an intensely active role
in running things. It was almost as if father and son had
exchanged between themselves the second and third stages of
the accepted Hindu scheme of life: the father was entangled in
the world, the son longed to separate himself into a life of
philosophical detachment.

Pran, however, whether he liked it or not, was what the
scriptures would call a householder. He enjoyed Savita’s
company, he basked in her warmth and care and beauty, he
looked forward to the birth of their child. He was determined
not to depend on his father for financial support, although the
small salary of a department lecturer zoo rupees per month was barely enough to subsist on ‘to subside on’, as he told
himself in moments of cynicism. But he had applied for a
readership that had recently fallen open in the department; the
salary attached to that post was less pitiful, and it would be a
step up in terms of the academic hierarchy. Pran did not care
about titular prestige, but he realized that designations helped
one’s designs. He wanted to see certain things done, and being
a reader would help him do them. He believed that he
deserved the

68job, but he had also learned that merit was only one
criterion among several.

His experience of the recurrent asthmatic illness that had
afflicted him since childhood had made him calm. Excitement

disturbed his breathing, and caused him pain and
incapacitation, and he had therefore almost dispensed with
excitability. This was the simple logic of it, but the path itself
had been difficult. He had studied patience, and by slow
practice he had become patient. But Professor O.P. Mishra had
got under his skin in a way Pran had not been able to envisage.

‘Professor Mishra,’ said Pran, ‘I am pleased that the
committee has decided to consider this proposal, and I am
delighted that it has been placed second on the agenda today
and has at last come up for discussion. My main argument is
quite simple. You have read my note on the subject’ - he
nodded around the table to Dr Gupta and Dr Narayanan - ‘and
you will, I am sure, appreciate that there is nothing radical in
my suggestion.’ He looked down at the pale blue type of the
cyclostyled sheets before him. ‘As you can see, we have
twenty-one writers whose works we consider it essential for
our B.A students to read in order for them to obtain a proper
understanding of Modern British Literature. But there is no
Joyce. And, I might add, no Lawrence. These two writers -‘

‘Wouldn’t it be better,’ interrupted Professor Mishra, wiping
an eyelash away from the corner of his eye, ‘wouldn’t it be
better if we were to concentrate on Joyce for the moment ? We
will take up Lawrence at our session next month - before we
adjourn for the summer vacation.’

‘The two matters are interlinked, surely,’ said Pran, looking
around the table for support. Dr Narayanan was about to say
something when Professor Mishra pointed out :

‘But not on this agenda, Dr Kapoor, not on this agenda.’ He
smiled at Pran sweetly, and his eyes twinkled. He then placed
his huge white hands, palms down, on the table and said, ‘But
what were you saying when I so rudely interrupted ?’

Pran looked at the large white hands emanating from

69the grand pulp of Professor Mishra’s round body, and
thought, I may look thin and fit, but I am not, and this man, for
all his slug-like pallor and bulk, has a great deal of stamina. If
I am to get agreement on this measure I must remain calm and
collected.

He smiled around the table, and said: ‘Joyce is a great , writer.
This is now universally acknowledged. He is, for 1 instance,
the subject of increasing academic study in ] America. I do
think he should be on our syllabus too.’ *

‘Dr Kapoor,’ the high voice responded, ‘each point in the
universe must make up its own mind on the question of
acknowledgement before acknowledgement can be considered
to be universal. We in India pride ourselves on our
Independence - an Independence won at great expense by the
best men of several generations, a fact I need not emphasize to
the illustrious son of an even more illustrious father. We
should hesitate before we blindly allow the American
dissertation mill to order our priorities. What do you say, Dr
Narayanan ?’

Dr Narayanan, who was a Romantic Revivalist, seemed to
look deep into his soul for a few seconds. ‘That is a good
point,’ he said judiciously, shaking his head sideways for
emphasis.

‘If we do not keep pace with our companions,’ continued
Professor Mishra, ‘perhaps it is because we hear a different
drummer. Let us step to the music that we hear, we in India. To
quote an American,’ he added.

Pran looked down at the table and said quietly: ‘I say Joyce is
a great writer because I believe he is a great writer, not
because of what the Americans say.’ He remembered his first
introduction to Joyce: a friend had lent him Ulysses a month
before his Ph.D. oral examination at Allahabad University and
he had, as a result, ignored his own subject to the point where
he had jeopardized his academic career.

Dr Narayanan looked at him and came out suddenly in
unexpected support. ‘ “The Dead”,’ said Dr Narayanan. ‘A
fine story. I read it twice.’

Pran looked at him gratefully.Professor Mishra looked at Dr
Narayanan’s small, bald head almost approvingly. ‘Very good,
very good,’ he said, as if applauding a small child. ‘But’ - and
his voice assumed a cutting edge - ‘there is more to Joyce than
“The Dead”. There is the unreadable Ulysses. There is the
worse than unreadable Finnegans Wake. This kind of writing
is unhealthy for our students. It encourages them, as it were, in
sloppy and ungrammatical writing. And what about the ending
of Ulysses? There are young and impressionable women
whom in our courses it is our responsibility to introduce to the
higher things of life, Dr Kapoor - your charming sisterin-law
for example. Would you put a book like Ulysses into her hands
?’ Professor Mishra smiled benignly.

‘Yes,’ said Pran simply.

Dr Narayanan looked interested. Dr Gupta, who was mainly
interested in Anglo-Saxon and Middle English, looked at his
nails.

‘It is heartening to come across a young man - a young
lecturer’ - Professor Mishra looked over at the rank-conscious
reader, Dr Gupta - ‘who is so, shall I say, so, well, direct in his
opinions and so willing to share them with his colleagues,
however senior they may be. It is heartening. We may disagree
of course; but India is a democracy and we can speak our
minds….’ He stopped for a few seconds, and stared out of the
window at the dusty laburnum. ‘A democracy. Yes. But even
democracies are faced with hard choices. There can be only
one head of department, for example. And when a post falls
open, of all the deserving candidates only one can be selected.
We are already hardpressed to teach twenty-one writers in the
time we allot to this paper. If Joyce goes in, what comes out ?’

‘Flecker,’ said Pran without a moment’s hesitation.

Professor Mishra laughed indulgently. ‘Ah, Dr Kapoor, Dr
Kapoor …’ he intoned,

‘Pass not beneath, O Caravan, or pass not singing. Have

you heard That silence where the birds are dead yet something
pipeth

like a bird ?

7iJames Elroy Flecker, James Elroy Flecker.’ That seemed to
settle it in his mind.

Fran’s face became completely impassive. Does he believe this
? he thought. Does he really believe what he is implying ?
Aloud he said, ‘If Fletcher - Flecker - is indispensable, I

suggest we include Joyce as our twenty-second writer. I would
be pleased to put it to the committee for a vote.’ Surely,
thought Pran, the ignominy of being known to have turned
Joyce down (as opposed to merely having deferred the
decision indefinitely) would be something that the committee
would not be willing to face.

‘Ah, Dr Kapoor, you are angry. Do not get angry. You want to
pin us down,’ said Professor Mishra playfully. He , turned his
palms up on the table to display his owni helplessness. ‘But
we did not agree to decide the matter at 1 this meeting, only to
decide whether to decide it.’ 1

This was too much for Pran in his present mood, though 1 he
knew it was true. j

‘Please do not misunderstand me, Professor Mishra,’ he ‘ said,
‘but that line of argument may be taken by those of us not
well-versed in the finer forms of parliamentary byplay to be a
species of quibbling.’

‘A species of quibbling … a species of quibbling.’ Professor
Mishra appeared delighted by the phrase, while both his
colleagues looked appalled at Pran’s insubordination. (This is
like playing bridge with two dummies, thoughts Pran.)
Professor Mishra continued: ‘I will now order! coffee, and we
will collect ourselves and approach the issues calmly, as it
were.’

Dr Narayanan perked up at the prospect of coffee. Professor
Mishra clapped his hands, and a lean peon in a threadbare
green uniform came in.

‘Is coffee ready ?’ asked Professor Mishra in Hindi.

‘Yes, Sahib.’

‘Good.’ Professor Mishra indicated that it should be served.

The peon brought in a tray with a coffee pot, a small jug of hot
milk, a bowl of sugar, and four cups. Professor Mishra
indicated that he should serve the others first. The

72-I

peon did so in the usual manner. Then Professor Mishra was
offered coffee. As Professor Mishra poured coffee into his cup,
the peon moved the tray deferentially backwards. Professor
Mishra made to set down the coffee pot, and the peon moved
the tray forward. Professor Mishra picked up the milk jug and
began to add milk to his coffee, and the peon moved the tray
backwards. And so on for each of three spoons of sugar. It was
like a comic ballet. It would have been merely ridiculous,
thought Pran, this display of the naked gradient of power and
obsequiousness between the department head and the
department peon, if it had only been some other department at
some other university. But it was the English Department of
Brahmpur University - and it was through this man that Pran
had to apply to the selection committee for the readership he
both wanted and needed.

This same man whom in my first term I considered jovial,
bluff, expansive, charming, why have I transformed him in my
mind into such a caricature of a villain ? thought Pran looking
into his cup. Does he loathe me ? No, that is his strength: he
doesn’t. He just wants his own way. In effective politics hatred

is just not useful. For him all this is like a game of chess - on a
slightly vibrating board. He is fifty-eight - he has two more
years until he retires. How will I be able to put up with him for
so long ? A sudden murderous impulse seized Pran, whom
murderous impulses never seized, and he realized his hands
were trembling slightly. And all this over Joyce, he said to
himself. At least I haven’t had a bronchial attack. He looked
down at the pad on which he, as the junior member of the
committee, was taking the minutes of the meeting. It read
simply :

Present: Professor O.P. Mishra (head) ; Dr R.B. Gupta; Dr T.R.
Narayanan; Dr P. Kapoor.

i. The Minutes of the last meeting were read and approved.

73We have got nowhere, and we will get nowhere, he thought.

A few well-known lines from Tagore came into his head in
Tagore’s own English translation :

Where the clear stream of reason has not lost its way into

the dreary desert sand of dead habit; Where the mind is led
forward by Thee into ever-widening

thought and action -

Into that heaven of freedom, my Father, let my country awake.

At least his own mortal father had given him principles,
thought Pran, even if he had given him almost no time or
company when he was younger. His mind wandered back
home, to the small whitewashed house, to Savita, her sister,
her mother - the family that he had taken into his heart and that
had taken him into theirs; and then to the Ganges flowing
close by the house. (When he thought in English, it was the
Ganges, rather than the Ganga, to him.) He followed it first
downstream to Patna and Calcutta, then upstream past Banaras
till it divided at Allahabad; there he chose the Yamuna and
followed it to Delhi. Are things as closed-minded in the
capital? he asked himself. As mad, as mean, as silly, as rigid ?
How will I be able to live in Brahmpur all my life? And
Mishra will doubtless give me an excellent report just to see
the back of me.

1.17

BUT now Dr Gupta was laughing at a remark of Dr
Narayanan’s, and Professor Mishra was saying, ‘Consensus consensus is the goal, the civilized goal - how can we vote
when we might be divided two votes against two? There were
five Pandavas, they could have voted if they chose, but even
they did everything by consensus. They

74even took a wife by consensus, ha, ha, ha ! And Dr Varma is
indisposed as usual, so we are only four.’

Pran looked at the twinkling eyes, the great nose, the sweetly
pursed lips with reluctant admiration. University statutes
required that the syllabus committee, like departmental
committees of any kind, should consist of an odd number of
members. But Professor Mishra, as head of the department,
appointed the members of each committee within his purview
in such a way as always to include someone who for reasons

of health or research was likely to be indisposed or absent.
With an even number of members present, committees were
more reluctant than ever to bring things to the climax of a
vote. And the head, with his control over the agenda and the
pacing of a meeting, could in the circumstances gather even
more effective power into his hands.

‘I think we have, as it were, expended enough time on item
two,’ said Professor Mishra. ‘Shall we go on to chiasmus and
anacoluthia ?’ He was referring to a proposal, put forward by
himself, that they eliminate too detailed a study of traditional
figures of speech for the paper in Literary Theory and
Criticism. ‘And then we have the question of symmetrical
auxiliaries proposed by the junior member of the committee.
Though this will, of course, depend upon other departments
agreeing to our proposals. And finally, since the shades of
night are falling,’ continued Professor Mishra, ‘I think we
should, without prejudice to items five, six, and seven, wind
up the meeting. We can take up those items next month.’

But Pran was unwilling to be dissuaded from pressing on with
the unresolved question of Joyce. ‘I think we have now
collected ourselves,’ he said, ‘and can approach the issue
under discussion quite calmly. If I were willing to accept that
Ulysses might be a bit, well, difficult for B.A students, would
the committee agree to include Dubliners on the syllabus as a
first step? Dr Gupta, what do you think ?’

75Dr Gupta looked up at the slowly circulating fan. His ability
to get speakers on Old and Middle English invited to the
departmental seminar depended upon Professor Mishra’s
goodwill: outside speakers entailed incidental expenses, and
funds had to be approved by the head of the department. Dr
Gupta knew as well as anyone what ‘as a first step’ implied.
He looked up at Pran and said, ‘I would be willing -‘

But he was swiftly interrupted in his sentence, whatever that
might have been. ‘We are forgetting,’ Professor Mishra cut in,
‘something that even I, I must admit, did not bear in mind
earlier in this discussion. I mean that, by tradition, the Modern
British Literature paper does not include writers who were
living at the time of the Second World War.’ This was news to
Pran, who must have looked astonished, because Professor
Mishra felt compelled to explain: ‘This is not altogether a
matter for surprise. We need the distance of time objectively to
appraise the stature of modern writers, to include them in our
canon, as it were. Do remind me, Dr Kapoor … when did
Joyce die ?’

‘1941,’ said Pran sharply. It was clear that the great white
whale had known this all along.

‘Well, there you are …’ said Professor Mishra helplessly. His
finger moved down the agenda.

‘Eliot, of course, is still alive,’ said Pran quietly, looking at the
list of prescribed authors.

The head of the department looked as if he had been slapped
across the face. He opened his mouth slightly, then pursed his
lips together. The jolly twinkle appeared again in his eyes.
‘But Eliot, Eliot, surely - we have objective criteria enough in
his case - why, even Dr Leavis -‘

Professor Mishra clearly responded to a different drummer
from the Americans, reflected Pran. Aloud he said, ‘Dr Leavis,
as we know, greatly approves of Lawrence too ‘

‘We have agreed to discuss Lawrence next time,’ Professor
Mishra expostulated.

Pran gazed out of the window. It was getting dark and the
leaves of the laburnum now looked cool, not dusty. He went
on, not looking at Professor Mishra : ‘… and, besides,

76I

Joyce has a better claim as a British writer in Modern British
Literature than Eliot. So if we -‘

‘That, my young friend, if I may say so,’ cut in Professor
Mishra, ‘could be considered a species of quibbling.’ He was
recovering quickly from his shock. In a minute he would be
quoting Prufrock.

What is it about Eliot, thought Pran irrelevantly, his mind
wandering from the subject at hand, that makes him such a
sacred cow for us Indian intellectuals ? Aloud he said: ‘Let us
hope that T.S. Eliot has many more years of life, of productive
life. I am glad that, unlike Joyce, he did not die in 1941. But
we are now living in 1951, which implies that the pre-war rule
you mentioned, even if it is a tradition, could not be a very
ancient one. If we can’t do away with it, why not update it ?
Surely its purpose is that we should revere the dead above the
living - or, to be less sceptical, appraise the dead before the
living. Eliot, who is alive, has been granted a waiver. I propose
we grant Joyce one. A friendly compromise.’ Pran paused,
then added : ‘As it were.’ He smiled: ‘Dr Narayanan, are you
for “The Dead” ?’

‘Yes, well, I think so,’ said Dr Narayanan with the faintest of
responding smiles, before Professor Mishra could interrupt.

‘Dr Gupta ?’ asked Pran.

Dr Gupta could not look Professor Mishra in the eye.

‘I agree with Dr Narayanan,’ said Professor Gupta.

There was silence for a few seconds. Pran thought, I can’t
believe it. I’ve won. I’ve won. I can’t believe it.

And indeed, it seemed that he had. Everyone knew that the
approval of the Academic Council of the university was
usually a formality once the syllabus committee of a
department had decided matters.

As if nothing in the least untoward had occurred, the head of
the department gathered together the reins of the meeting. The
great soft hands scuttled across the cyclostyled sheets. ‘The
next item …’ said Professor Mishra with a smile, then paused
and began again : ‘But before we go on to the next item, I
should say that I personally have

77always greatly admired James Joyce as a writer. I am
delighted, needless to say -‘

A couple of lines of poetry came terrifyingly unbidden to
Fran’s mind :

Pale hands I loved beside the Shalimar,

Where are you now ? Who lies beneath your spell ?

and he burst into a fit of sudden laughter, incomprehensible
even to himself, which went on for twenty seconds and ended
in a spasm of coughing. He bent his head and tears streamed
down his cheeks. Professor Mishra rewarded him with a look
of unfeigned fury and hatred.

‘Sorry, sorry,’ muttered Pran as he recovered. Dr Gupta was
thumping him vigorously on the back, which was not helpful.
‘Please continue - I was overcome - it sometimes

happens ‘ But to offer any further explanation was

impossible.

The meeting was resumed and the next two points discussed
quickly. There was no real disagreement. It was dark now; the
meeting was adjourned. As Pran left the room Professor
Mishra put a friendly arm around his shoulder. ‘My dear boy,
that was a fine performance.’ Pran shuddered at the memory.
‘You are clearly a man of great integrity, intellectual and
otherwise.’ Oh, oh, what is he up to now ? thought Pran.
Professor Mishra continued : ‘The Proctor has been badgering
me since last Tuesday to submit a member of my department it’s our turn, you know - to

join the student welfare committee of the university ‘

Oh no, thought Pran, there goes one day every week. ‘… and I
have decided to volunteer you.’ I didn’t know the verb was
transitive, thought Pran. In the darkness - they were now
walking across the campus - it was difficult for Professor
Mishra entirely to disguise the active dislike in his high voice.
Pran could almost see the pursed lips, the specious twinkle. He
was silent, and that, to the head of the English Department,
implied acceptance.

‘I realize you are busy, my dear Dr Kapoor, what with your
extra tutorials, the Debating Society, the Colloquium,

78I

putting on plays, and so on ‘ said Professor Mishra.

‘The sort of thing that makes one deservedly popular with
students. But you are comparatively new here, my dear fellow
- five years is not a long time from the perspective of an old
fogey like me - and you must allow me to give you a word of
advice. Cut down on your unacademic activities. Don’t tire
yourself out unnecessarily. Don’t take things so seriously.
What were those wonderful lines of Yeats?

She bid me take life easy as the leaves grown on the tree, But I
being young and foolish with her did not agree.

I’m sure your charming wife would endorse that. Don’t drive
yourself so hard - your health depends on it. And your future, I
dare say…. In some ways you are your own worst enemy.’

But I am only my metaphorical enemy, thought Pran. And
obstinacy on my part has earned me the actual enmity of the
formidable Professor Mishra. But was Professor Mishra more
dangerous or less dangerous to him - in this matter of the
readership, for instance, now that Pran had won his hatred ?

What was Professor Mishra thinking, wondered Pran. He
imagined his thoughts went something like this: I should never
have got this uppity young lecturer onto the syllabus
committee. It’s too late, however, to regret all that. But at least
his presence here has kept him from working mischief in, say,
the admissions committee ; there he could have brought up all
kinds of objections to students I wanted to bring in if they
weren’t selected entirely on the basis of merit. As for the
university’s selection committee for the readership in English,
I must rig this somehow before I allow it to meet -

But Pran got no further clues to the inner working of that
mysterious intelligence. For at this point the paths of the two
colleagues diverged and, with expressions of great mutual
respect, they parted from each other.

791.18

MEENAKSHI, Arun’s wife, was feeling utterly bored, so she
decided to have her daughter Aparna brought to her. Aparna
was looking even more pretty than usual: round and fair and
black-haired with gorgeous eyes, as sharp as those of her
mother. Meenakshi pressed the electric buzzer twice (the
signal for the child’s ayah) and looked at the book in her lap. It
was Thomas Mann’s Buddenbrooks, and it was unutterably
dull. She didn’t know how she was going to get through
another five pages of it. Arun, delighted though he normally
was with her, had the irksome habit of throwing an improving
book her way now and then, and Meenakshi felt his

suggestions were more in the way of subtle commands. ‘A
wonderful book. …’ Arun would say some evening, laughing,
in the company of the oddly flippant crowd they mixed with, a
crowd that Meenakshi felt convinced could not possibly be
more interested than she was in Buddenbrooks or any other
such clotted Germanic construct. ‘… I have been reading this
marvellous book by Mann, and I’m now getting Meenakshi
involved in it.’ Some of the others, especially the languid Billy
Irani, would look from Arun to Meenakshi in momentary
wonderment, and the topic would pass to office matters or the
social world or racing or dancing or golf or the Calcutta Club
or complaints about ‘these bloody politicians’ or ‘these
brainless bureaucrats’, and Thomas Mann would be quite
forgotten. But Meenakshi would now feel obliged to read
enough of the book to convey an acquaintance with its
contents, and it seemed to make Arun happy to see her do so.

How wonderful Arun was, thought Meenakshi, and how
pleasant it was to live in this nice flat in Sunny Park, not far
from her father’s house on Ballygunge Circular Road, and
why did they have to have all these furious tiffs? Arun was
incredibly hotheaded and jealous, and she had only to look
languidly at the languid Billy for Arun to start smouldering
somewhere deep inside. It might be wonderful to have a
smouldering husband in bed later,

80VV.

Meenakshi reflected, but such advantages did not come
unadulterated. Sometimes Arun would go off into a
smouldering sulk, and was quite spoilt for love-making. Billy
Irani had a girlfriend, Shireen, but that made no difference to
Arun, who suspected Meenakshi (quite correctly) of
harbouring a casual lust for his friend. Shireen for her part
occasionally sighed amidst her cocktails and announced that
Billy was incorrigible.

When the ayah arrived in answer to the bell, Meenakshi said,
‘Baby lao!’ in a kind of pidgin Hindi. The aged ayah, most of
whose reactions were slow, turned creakingly to fulfil her
mistress’s behest. Aparna was fetched. She had been having
her afternoon nap, and yawned as she was brought in to her
mother. Her small fists were rubbing her eyes.

‘Mummy!’ said Aparna in English. ‘I’m sleepy, and Miriam
woke me up.’ Miriam, the ayah, upon hearing her name
spoken, although she could understand no English, grinned at
the child with toothless goodwill.

‘I know, precious baby doll,’ said Meenakshi, ‘but Mummy
had to see you, she was so bored. Come and give - yes - and
now on the other side.’

Aparna was wearing a mauve dress of flouncy fluffy stuff and
was looking, thought her mother, inexcusably enchanting.
Meenakshi’s eyes went to her dressing-table mirror and she
noticed with a surge of joy what a wonderful mother-and-child
pair they made. ‘You are looking so lovely,’ she informed
Aparna, ‘that I think I will have a whole line of little girls….
Aparna, and Bibeka, and Charulata, and -‘

Here she was cut off by Aparna’s glare. ‘If another baby
comes into this house,’ announced Aparna, ‘I will throw it
straight into the waste-paper basket.’

‘Oh,’ said Meenakshi, more than a little startled. Aparna,
living among so many opinionated personalities, had quite
early developed a powerful vocabulary. But three-year-olds
were not supposed to express themselves so lucidly, and in

conditional sentences at that. Meenakshi looked at Aparna and
sighed.

‘You are so scrumptious,’ she told Aparna. ‘Now have

81your milk.’ To the ayah she said, ‘Dudh lao. Ek dum !’ And
Miriam creaked off to get a glass of milk for the little girl.

For some reason the ayah’s slow-moving back irritated
Meenakshi and she thought: We really ought to replace the
T.C. She’s quite needlessly senile. This was her and Arun’s
private abbreviation for the ayah and Meenakshi laughed with
pleasure as she remembered the occasion over the breakfast
table when Arun had turned from the Statesman crossword to
say, ‘Oh, do get the toothless crone out of the room. She quite
puts me off my omelette.’ Miriam had been the T.C ever since.
Living with Arun was full of sudden delightful moments like
that, thought Meenakshi. If only it could all be that way.

But the trouble was that she also had to run the house, and she
hated it. The elder daughter of Mr Justice Chatterji had always
had everything done for her - and she was now discovering
how trying it could be to handle things on her own. Managing
the staff (ayah, servant-cum-cook, parttime sweeper, part-time
gardener; Arun supervised the driver, who was on the
company payroll) ; doing the accounts; buying those items that
one simply couldn’t trust the servant or the ayah to buy; and
making sure that everything fitted within the budget. This last
she found especially difficult. She had been brought up in
some luxury, and though she had insisted (against her parents’
advice) on the romantic adventure of standing after marriage
entirely on their own four feet, she had found it impossible to
curb her taste for certain items (foreign soap, foreign butter,
and so on) that were intrinsic to the fabric of a civilized life.
She was very conscious of the fact that Arun helped support

everyone in his own family and often commented to him about
the fact.

‘Well,’ Arun had said just recently, ‘now that Savita’s married,
that’s one less, you’ll agree, darling.’ Meenakshi had sighed,
replying in a couplet :

‘Marry one - and what’s my fate ? Every Mehra on my plate.’

82.Arun had frowned. He had been reminded once again of the
fact that Meenakshi’s elder brother was a poet. It was from
long familiarity - almost obsession - with rhyme that most of
the younger Chatterjis had learned to improvise couplets,
sometimes of surpassing puerility.

The ayah brought the milk and left. Meenakshi turned her
lovely eyes back to Euddenbrooks while Aparna sat on the bed
drinking her milk. With a sound of impatience Meenakshi
threw Thomas Mann onto the bed and followed him there,
closed her eyes and went off to sleep. She was awakened with
a shock twenty minutes later by Aparna, who was pinching her
breast.

‘Don’t be horrid, Aparna precious. Mummy’s trying to sleep,’
said Meenakshi.

‘Don’t sleep,’ said Aparna. ‘I want to play.’ Unlike other
children of her age, Aparna never used her name in the
Caesarean third person, though her mother did.

‘Darling sweetheart, Mummy is tired, she’s been reading a
book and she doesn’t want to play. Not now, anyway. Later,

when Daddy comes home, you can play with him. Or you can
play with Uncle Varun when he returns from college. What
have you done with your glass ?’

‘When will Daddy come home ?’

‘I’d say in about an hour,’ replied Meenakshi.

‘I’d say in about an hour,’ said Aparna speculatively, as if she
liked the phrase. ‘I want a necklace too,’ she added, and
tugged at her mother’s gold chain.

Meenakshi gave her daughter a hug. ‘And you shall have one,’
she said, and dismissed the subject. ‘Now go to Miriam.’

‘No.’ ‘ .

‘Then stay here if you want. But do be quiet, darling.’

Aparna was quiet for a while. She looked at Buddenbrooks, at
her empty glass, at her sleeping mother, at the quilt, at the
mirror, at the ceiling. Then she said, ‘Mummy ?’ tentatively.
There was no response.

‘Mummy ?’ Aparna attempted a few notches louder.

‘Mmm ?’

‘MUMMY !’ yelled Aparna at the top of her lungs.

83Meenakshi sat bolt upright and shook Aparna. ‘Do you want
me to spank you ?’ she asked.

‘No,’ replied Aparna definitively.

‘Then what is it ? Why are you shouting ? What were you
going to say ?’

‘Have you had a hard day, darling?’ asked Aparna, hoping to
arouse a response to her imitative charm.

‘Yes,’ said Meenakshi shortly. ‘Now, darling, pick up that
glass and go to Miriam at once.’

‘Shall I comb your hair ?’

‘No.’

Aparna got down reluctantly from the bed and made her way
to the door. She toyed with the idea of saying, Til tell Daddy!’
though what she could have complained about was left
unformulated. Her mother meanwhile was once again sleeping
sweetly, her lips slightly parted, her long black hair spread
across the pillow. It was so hot in the afternoon, and
everything tilted her towards a long and languorous sleep. Her
breasts rose and fell gently, and she dreamed about Arun, who
was handsome and dashing and covenanted, and who would
be coming home in an hour. And after a while she began to
dream about Billy Irani, whom they would be meeting later
that evening.

When Arun arrived, he left his briefcase in the drawing room,
walked into the bedroom, and closed the door. Seeing
Meenakshi asleep, he paced up and down for a while, then
took off his coat and tie, and lay down beside her without
disturbing her sleep. But after a while his hand moved to her
forehead and then down her face to her breasts. Meenakshi
opened her eyes and said, ‘Oh.’ She was momentarily
bewildered. After a while she asked, ‘What’s the time ?’

‘Five-thirty. I came home early just as I promised - and I found
you asleep.’

‘I couldn’t sleep earlier, darling. Aparna woke me up every
few minutes.’

‘What’s the programme for the evening?’ ‘Dinner and dancing
with Billy and Shireen.’

84’Oh yes, of course.’ After a pause Arun continued: ‘To tell
you the truth, darling, I’m rather tired. I wonder whether we
shouldn’t simply call it off tonight ?’

‘Oh, you’ll revive quickly enough after you’ve had a drink,’
said Meenakshi brightly. ‘And a glance or two from Shireen,’
she added.

‘I suppose you’re right, dear.’ Arun reached out for her. He
had had a little trouble with his back a month ago, but had
quite recovered.

‘Naughty boy,’ said Meenakshi, and pushed his hand away.
After a while she added, ‘The T.C has been cheating us on the
Ostermilk.’

‘Ah ? Has she ?’ said Arun indifferently, then swerved off to a
subject that interested him - ‘I discovered today that we were
being overcharged sixty thousand on the new paper project by
one of our local businessmen. We’ve asked him to revise his
estimates, of course, but it does

rather shock one No sense of business ethics - or

personal ethics either. He was in the office the other day, and
he assured me that he was making us a special offer because of
what he called our long-standing relationship. Now I find,
after talking to Jock Mackay, that that’s the line he took with
them as well - but charged them sixty thousand less than us.’

‘What will you do ?’ Meenakshi asked dutifully. She had
switched off a few sentences ago.

Arun talked on for five minutes or so, while Meenakshi’s mind
wandered. When he stopped and looked at her questioningly,
she said, yawning a little from residual sleepiness :

‘How has your boss reacted to all this ?’

‘Difficult to say. With Basil Cox it’s difficult to say anything,
even when he’s delighted. In this case I think he’s as annoyed
by the possible delay as pleased by the definite saving.’ Arun
unburdened himself for another five minutes while Meenakshi
began to buff her nails.

The bedroom door had been bolted against interruption, but
when Aparna saw her father’s briefcase she knew that he had
returned and insisted upon being admitted. Arun

85opened the door and gave her a hug, and for the next hour or
so they did a jigsaw featuring a giraffe, which Aparna had seen
in a toyshop a week after being taken to the Brahmpur Zoo.
They had done the jigsaw several times before, but Aparna had
not yet tired of it. Nor had Arun. He adored his daughter and
occasionally felt it was a pity that he and Meenakshi went out
almost every evening. But one simply couldn’t let one’s life
come to a standstill because one had a child. What, after all,
were ayahs for? What, for that matter, were younger brothers
for ?

‘Mummy has promised me a necklace,’ said Aparna.

‘Has she, darling?’ said Arun. ‘How does she imagine she’s
going to buy it ? We can’t afford it at the moment.’

Aparna looked so disappointed at this latest intelligence that
Arun and Meenakshi turned to each other with transferred
adoration.

‘But she will,’ said Aparna, quietly and determinedly. ‘Now I
want to do a jigsaw.’

‘But we’ve just done one,“ protested Arun.

‘I want to do another.’

‘You handle her, Meenakshi,’ said Arun.

‘You handle her, darling,’ said Meenakshi. ‘I must get ready.
And please clear the bedroom floor.’

So for a while Arun and Aparna, banished to the drawing
room this time, lay on the carpet putting together a jigsaw of
the Victoria Memorial while Meenakshi bathed and dressed
and perfumed and ornamented herself.

Varun returned from college, slid past Arun into his tiny box
of a room, and sat down with his books. But he seemed
nervous, and could not settle down to studying. When Arun
went to get ready, Aparna was transferred to him; and the rest
of Varun’s evening was spent at home trying to keep her
amused.

The long-necked Meenakshi turned numerous heads when
their party of four entered Firpos for dinner. Arun told Shireen
she was looking gorgeous and Billy looked with soulful
languor at Meenakshi and said that she looked divine, and
things went wonderfully well and were followed

86by some pleasantly titillating dancing at the 300 Club.
Meenakshi and Arun were not really able to afford all this Billy Irani had independent means - but it seemed intolerable
that they, for whom this kind of life was so obviously
intended, should be deprived of it by a mere lack of funds.
Meenakshi could not help noticing, through dinner and
beyond, the lovely little gold danglers that Shireen was
wearing, and that hung so becomingly from her little velvety
ears.

It was a warm evening. In the car on the way back home Arun
said to Meenakshi, ‘Give me your hand, darling,’ and
Meenakshi, placing one red nail-polished fingertip on the back
of his hand, said, ‘Here!’ Arun thought that this was
delightfully elegant and flirtatious. But Meenakshi had her
mind on something else.

Later, when Arun had gone to bed, Meenakshi unlocked her
jewellery case (the Chatterjis did not believe in giving their
daughter great quantities of jewellery but she had been given
quite enough for her likely requirements) and took out the two
gold medals so precious to Mrs Rupa Mehra’s heart. She had
given these to Meenakshi at the time of her wedding as a gift
to the bride of her elder son. This she felt was the appropriate
thing to do; she had nothing else to give, and she felt that her
husband would have approved. On the back of the medals was
engraved: ‘Thomasson Engineering College Roorkee.
Raghubir Mehra. Civil Engg. First. 1916’ and ‘Physics. First.
1916’ respectively. Two lions crouched sternly on pedestals on
each medal. Meenakshi looked at the medals, then balanced

them in her hands, then held the cool and precious discs to her
cheeks. She wondered how much they weighed. She thought
of the gold chain she had promised Aparna and the gold drops
she had virtually promised herself. She had examined them
quite carefully as they hung from Shireen’s little ears. The
danglers were shaped like tiny pears.

When Arun rather impatiently called her to bed, she
murmured, ‘Just coming.’ But it was a minute or two before
she joined him. ‘What are you thinking of, darling ?’ he asked
her. ‘You look dangerously preoccupied.’ But

87• n xA/hat had

i-w . , w.

I

119 \

‘.** M-^ Ph°”ed “

“

T». •*. r K** te° ° b» *« ** ^fc.” £

‘»srr««- ir» v s *£*oi a sood \ *“^s^na,c.e«*.-«’ eiKoko,

s.-*L«ro-‘uutara-1 ltos-o,«

‘^fett, ^a«am f n , Street ,ewe\ers t

^’^^^^

,eWel\ers of ^U they dey t

“Ssisiss^ ssfa^-r-

‘*’ /. e about *« P1’”’

«&, ^ ?- ‘OU’ ‘ k ,s s. - « !»*“ ‘ °”

.

^B 88 __^^^M

^ow that I kn one, not b shopkeepers ^

Prop°SV°by Ê ^«rrV^on; \Coty ,

Saeeda Bai’s accompanists were a study in contrast. Both were
about twenty-five, and both were devoted and skilled
musicians. Both were fond of each other, and deeply attached by economics and affection - to Saeeda Bai. But beyond that
the resemblance ended. Ishaq Khan, who bowed his sarangi

with such ease and harmoniousness, almost self-effacement,
was a slightly sardonic bachelor. Motu Chand, so nicknamed
because of his plumpness, was a contented man, already a
father of four. He looked a bit like a bulldog with his large
eyes and snuffling mouth, and was benignly torpid, except
when frenziedly drumming his tabla.

They were discussing Ustad Majeed Khan, one of the most
famous classical singers of India, a notoriously aloof man who
lived in the old city, not far from where Saeeda Bai had grown
up.

‘But what I don’t understand, Saeeda Begum,’ said Motu
Chand, leaning awkwardly backwards because of his paunch,
‘is why he should be so critical of us small people. There he
sits with his head above the clouds, like Lord Shiva on
Kailash. Why should he open his third eye to burn us up ?’

‘There is no accounting for the moods of the great,’ said Ishaq
Khan. He touched his sarangi with his left hand and went on,
‘Now look at this sarangi - it’s a noble instrument - yet the
noble Majeed Khan hates it. He never allows it to accompany
him.’

Saeeda Bai nodded; Motu Chand made reassuring sounds. ‘It
is the loveliest of all instruments,’ he said.

‘You kafir,’ said Ishaq Khan, smiling twistedly at his friend.
‘How can you pretend to like this instrument? What is it made
of?’

‘Well, wood of course,’ said Motu Chand, now leaning
forward with an effort.

‘Look at the little wrestler,’ laughed Saeeda Bai. ‘We must
feed him some laddus.’ She called out for her maid, and sent
her to get some sweets.

Ishaq continued to wind the coils of his argument around the
struggling Motu Chand.

145’Wood !’ he cried. ‘And what else ?’

‘Oh, well, you know, Khan Sahib - strings and so on,’ said
Motu Chand, defeated as to Ishaq’s intention.

‘And what are these strings made of?’ continued Ishaq Khan
relentlessly.

‘Ah!’ said Motu Chand, getting a glimpse of his meaning.
Ishaq was not a bad fellow, but he appeared to get a cruel
pleasure from worsting Motu Chand in an argument.

‘Gut,’ said Ishaq. ‘These strings are made of gut. As you well
know. And the front of a sarangi is made of skin. The hide of a
dead animal. Now what would your brahmins of Brahmpur
say if they were forced to touch it ? Would they not be
polluted by it ?’

Motu Chand looked downcast, then rallied. ‘Anyway, I’m not
a brahmin, you know …’ he began.

‘Don’t tease him,’ said Saeeda Bai to Ishaq Khan.

‘I love the fat kafir too much to want to tease him,’ said Ishaq
Khan.

This was not true. Since Motu Chand was of an alarmingly
equable bent of mind, what Ishaq Khan liked more than
anything else was to upset his balance. But this time Motu
Chand reacted in an irksomely philosophical manner.

‘Khan Sahib is very kind,’ he said. ‘But sometimes even the
ignorant have wisdom, and he would be the first to
acknowledge this. Now for me the sarangi is not what it is
made of but what it makes - these divine sounds. In the hands
of an artist even this gut and this skin can be made to sing.’
His face wreathed with a contented, almost Sufi, smile. ‘After
all, what are we all but gut and skin ? And yet’- his forehead
creased with concentration - ‘in the hands of one who - the
One….’

But the maid now came in with the sweets and Motu Chand’s
theological meanderings halted. His plump and agile fingers
quickly reached for a laddu as round as himself and popped it
whole into his mouth.

After a while Saeeda Bai said, ‘But we were not discussing the
One above’ - she pointed upwards - ‘but the One

146to the West.’ She pointed in the direction of Old Brahmpur.

‘They are the same,’ said Ishaq Khan. ‘We pray both
westwards and upwards. I am sure Ustad Majeed Khan would
not take it amiss if we were mistakenly to turn to him in prayer
one evening. And why not?’ he ended ambiguously. ‘When we

pray to such lofty art, we are praying to God himself.’ He
looked at Motu Chand for approval, but Motu appeared to be
either sulking or concentrating on his laddu.

The maid re-entered and announced: ‘There is some trouble at
the gate.’

Saeeda Bai looked more interested than alarmed.

‘What sort of trouble, Bibbo ?’ she asked.

The maid looked at her cheekily and said, ‘It seems that a
young man is quarrelling with the watchman.’

‘Shameless thing, wipe that expression off your face,’ said
Saeeda Bai. ‘Hmm,’ she went on, ‘what does he look like?’

‘How would I know, Begum Sahiba?’ protested the maid.

‘Don’t be troublesome, Bibbo. Does he look respectable ?’

‘Yes,’ admitted the maid. ‘But the street-lights were not bright
enough for me to see anything more.’

‘Call the watchman,’ said Saeeda Bai. ‘There’s only us here,’
she added, as the maid looked hesitant.

‘But the young man ?’ asked the maid.

‘If he’s as respectable as you say, Bibbo, he’ll remain outside.’

‘Yes, Begum Sahiba,’ said the maid and went to do her
bidding.

‘Who do you think it could be ?’ mused Saeeda Bai aloud, and
was silent for a minute.

The watchman entered the house, left his spear at the front
entrance, and climbed heavily up the stairs to the gallery. He
stood at the doorway of the room where they were sitting, and
saluted. With his khaki turban, khaki uniform, thick boots and
bushy moustache, he was corn-

147pletely out of place in that femininely furnished room. But
he did not seem at all ill at ease.

‘Who is this man and what does he want ?’ asked Saeeda Bai.

‘He wants to come in and speak with you,’ said the watchman
phlegmatically.

‘Yes, yes, I thought as much - but what is his name ?’

‘He won’t say, Begum Sahiba. Nor will he take no for an
answer. Yesterday too he came, and told me to give you a
message, but it was so impertinent, I decided not to.’

Saeeda Bai’s eyes flashed. ‘You decided not to ?’ she asked.

‘The Raja Sahib was here,’ said the watchman calmly.

‘Hmmh. And the message ?’

‘That he is one who lives in love,’ said the watchman
impassively.

He had used a different word for love and had thus lost the pun
on Prem Nivas.

‘One who lives in love ? What can he mean ?’ remarked
Saeeda Bai to Motu and Ishaq. The two looked at each other,
Ishaq Khan with a slight smirk of disdain.

‘This world is populated by donkeys,’ said Saeeda Bai, but
whom she was referring to was unclear. ‘Why didn’t he leave a
note? So those were his exact words? Neither very idiomatic
nor very witty.’

The watchman searched his memory and came out with a
closer approximation to the actual words Maan had used the
previous evening. At any rate, ‘prem’ and ‘nivas’ both figured
in his sentence.

All three musicians solved the riddle immediately.

‘Ah!’ said Saeeda Bai, amused. ‘I think I have an admirer.
What do you say ? Shall we let him in ? Why not ?’

Neither of the others demurred - as, indeed, how could they ?
The watchman was told to let the young man in. And Bibbo
was told to tell Tasneem to stay in her room.

148*

2.13

MAAN, who was fretting by the gate, could hardly believe his
good fortune at being so speedily admitted. He felt a surge of
gratitude towards the watchman and pressed a rupee into his
hand. The watchman left him at the door of the house, and the
maid pointed him up to the room.

As Maan’s footsteps were heard in the gallery outside Saeeda
Bai’s room, she called out, ‘Come in, come in, Dagh Sahib. Sit
down and illumine our gathering.’

Maan stood outside the door for a second, and looked at
Saeeda Bai. He was smiling with pleasure, and Saeeda Bai
could not help smiling back at him. He was dressed simply
and immaculately in a well-starched white kurtapyjama. The
fine chikan embroidery on his kurta complemented the
embroidery on his fine white cotton cap. His shoes - slip-on
jutis of soft leather, pointed at the toe were also white.

‘How did you come ?’ asked Saeeda Bai.

‘I walked.’

‘These are fine clothes to risk in the dust.’

Maan said simply, ‘It is just a few minutes away.’

‘Please - sit down.’

Maan sat cross-legged on the white-sheeted floor.

Saeeda Bai began to busy herself making paan. Maan looked
at her wonderingly.

‘I came yesterday too, but was less fortunate.’

‘I know, I know,’ said Saeeda Bai. ‘My fool of a watchman
turned you away. What can I say ? We are not all blessed with
the faculty of discrimination ‘

‘But I’m here today,’ said Maan, rather obviously.

‘Wherever Dagh has sat down, he has sat down ?’ asked
Saeeda Bai, with a smile. Her head was bent, and she was
spreading a little white dab of lime on the paan leaves.

‘He may not quit your assembly at all this time,’ said Maan.

Since she was not looking directly at him, he could look at her
without embarrassment. She had covered her head with her
sari before he had come in. But the soft, smooth

149skin of her neck and shoulders was exposed, and Maan
found the tilt of her neck as she bent over her task
indescribably charming.

Having made a pair of paans she impaled them on a little
silver toothpick with tassels, and offered them to him. He took
them and put them in his mouth, pleasantly surprised at the
taste of coconut, which was an ingredient Saeeda Bai was fond
of adding to her paan.

‘I see you are wearing your own style of Gandhi cap,’ said
Saeeda Bai, after popping a couple of paans into her mouth.
She did not offer any to Ishaq Khan or Motu Chand, but then
they seemed to have virtually melted into the background.

Maan touched the side of his embroidered white cap
nervously, unsure of himself.

‘No, no, Dagh Sahib, don’t trouble yourself. This isn’t a
church, you know.’ Saeeda Bai looked at him and said, ‘I was
reminded of other white caps one sees floating around in
Brahmpur. The heads that wear them have grown taller
recently.’

‘I am afraid you are going to accuse me of the accident of my
birth,’ said Maan.

‘No, no,’ said Saeeda Bai. ‘Your father has been an old patron
of the arts. It is the other Congress-wallahs I was thinking of.’

‘Perhaps I should wear a cap of a different colour the next time
I come,’ said Maan.

Saeeda Bai raised an eyebrow.

‘Assuming I am ushered into your presence,’ Maan added
humbly.

Saeeda Bai thought to herself: What a well-brought-up young
man. She indicated to Motu Chand that he should bring the
tablas and harmonium that were lying in the corner of the
room.

To Maan she said, ‘And now what does Hazrat Dagh
command us to sing ?’

‘Why, anything,’ said Maan, throwing banter to the winds.

‘Not a ghazal, I hope,’ said Saeeda Bai, pressing down a

150r

key on the harmonium to help the tabla and sarangi tune up.

‘No ?’ asked Maan, disappointed.

‘Ghazals are for open gatherings or the intimacy of lovers,’
said Saeeda Bai. Til sing what my family is best known for
and what my Ustad best taught me.’

She began a thumri in Raag Pilu, ‘Why then are you not
speaking to me ?’ and Maan’s face brightened up. As she sang
he floated off into a state of intoxication. The sight of her face,
the sound of her voice, and the scent of her perfume were
intertwined in his happiness.

After two or three thumris and a dadra, Saeeda Bai indicated
that she was tired, and that Maan should leave.

He left reluctantly, showing, however, more good humour than
reluctance. Downstairs, the watchman found a five-rupee note
pressed into his hand.

Out on the street Maan trod on air.

She will sing a ghazal for me sometime, he promised himself.
She will, she certainly will.

2.14

IT was Sunday morning. The sky was bright and clear. The
weekly bird market near the Barsaat Mahal was in full swing.
Thousands of birds - mynas, partridges, pigeons, parakeets fighting birds, eating birds, racing birds, talking birds - sat or
fluttered in iron or cane cages in little stalls from which rowdy
hawkers cried out the excellence and cheapness of their wares.

The pavement had been taken over by the bird market, and
buyers or passers-by like Ishaq had to walk on the road
surface, bumping against rickshaws and bicycles and the
occasional tonga.

There was even a pavement stall with books about birds. Ishaq
picked up a flimsy, blunt-typed paperback about owls and
spells, and looked idly through to see what uses this unlucky
bird could be put to. It appeared to be a book of Hindu black
magic, The Tantra of Owls, though it was printed in Urdu. He
read :

151Sovereign Remedy to Obtain Employment Take the tailfeathers of an owl and a crow, and burn them together in a fire
made from mango wood until they form ash. Place this ash on
your forehead like a caste-mark when you go to seek
employment, and you will most certainly obtain it.

He frowned and read on :

Method of Keeping a Woman in Your Power If you want to
keep a woman in your control, and wish to prevent her from
coming under the influence of anyone else, then use the
technique described below :

Take the blood of an owl, the blood of a jungle fowl and the
blood of a bat in equal proportions, and after smearing the
mixture on your penis have intercourse with the woman. Then
she will never desire another man.’

Ishaq felt almost sick. These Hindus! he thought. On an
impulse he bought the book, deciding that it was an excellent
means of provoking his friend Motu Chand.

‘I have one on vultures as well,’ said the bookseller helpfully.

‘No, this is all I want,’ said Ishaq, and walked on.

He stopped at a stall where a large number of tiny, almost
formless grey-green balls of stubbly flesh lay imprisoned in a
hooped cage.

‘Ah!’ he said.

His look of interest had an immediate effect on the whitecapped stall-keeper, who appraised him, glancing at the book
in his hand.

‘These are not ordinary parakeets, Huzoor, these are hill
parakeets, Alexandrine parakeets as the English sahibs say.’

The English had left more than three years ago, but Ishaq let it
pass.

‘I know, I know,’ he said.

‘I can tell an expert when I see one,’ said the stall-keeper

152.in a most friendly manner. ‘Now, why not have this one?
Only two rupees - and it will sing like an angel.’

‘A male angel or a female angel ?’ said Ishaq severely.

The stall-keeper suddenly became obsequious.

‘Oh, you must forgive me, you must forgive me. People here
are so ignorant, one can hardly bear to part with one’s most
promising birds, but for one who knows parakeets I will do
anything, anything. Have this one, Huzoor.’ And he picked out
one with a larger head, a male.

Ishaq held it for a few seconds, then placed it back in the cage.
The man shook his head, then said :

‘Now for a true fancier, what can I provide that is better than
this ? Is it a bird from Rudhia District that you want ? Or from
the foothills in Horshana? They talk better than mynas.’

Ishaq simply said, ‘Let’s see something worth seeing.’

The man went to the back of the shop and opened a cage in
which three little half-fledged birds sat huddled together. Ishaq
looked at them silently, then asked to see one of them.

He smiled, thinking of parakeets he had known. His aunt was
very fond of them, and had one who was still alive at the age
of seventeen. ‘This one,’ he said to the man. ‘And you know
by now that I will not be fooled about the price either.’

They haggled for a while. Until the money changed hands the
stall-keeper seemed a bit resentful. Then, as Ishaq was about
to leave - with his purchase nestled in his handkerchief - the

stall-keeper said in an anxious voice, ‘Tell me how he is doing
when you come by next time.’

‘What do they call you ?’ asked Ishaq.

‘Muhammad Ismail, Huzoor. And how are you addressed ?’ ‘-

‘Ishaq Khan.’

‘Then we are brothers!’ beamed the stall-keeper. ‘You must
always get your birds from my shop.’

‘Yes, yes,’ agreed Ishaq, and walked hurriedly away. This was
a good bird he had got, and would delight the heart of young
Tasneem.

1532.15

ISHAQ went home, had lunch, and fed the bird a little flour
mixed with water. Later, carrying the parakeet in his
handkerchief, he made his way to Saeeda Bai’s house. From
time to time he looked at it in appreciation, imagining what an
excellent and intelligent bird it potentially was. He was in high
spirits. A good Alexandrine parakeet was his favourite kind of
parrot. As he walked towards Nabiganj he almost bumped into
a hand-cart.

He arrived at Saeeda Bai’s house at about four and told
Tasneem that he had brought something for her. She was to try
and guess what it was.

‘Don’t tease me, Ishaq Bhai,’ she said, fixing her beautiful
large eyes on his face. ‘Please tell me what it is.’

Ishaq looked at her and thought that ‘gazelle-like’ really did
suit Tasneem. Delicate-featured, tall and slender, she did not
greatly resemble her elder sister. Her eyes were liquid and her
expression tender. She was lively, but always seemed to be on
the point of taking flight.

‘Why do you insist on calling me Bhai ?’ he asked.

‘Because you are virtually my brother,’ said Tasneem. ‘I need
one, too. And your bringing me this gift proves it. Now please
don’t keep me in suspense. Is it something to wear ?’

‘Oh no - that would be superfluous to your beauty,’ said Ishaq,
smiling.

‘Please don’t talk that way,’ said Tasneem, frowning. ‘Apa
might hear you, and then there will be trouble.’

‘Well, here it is ‘ And Ishaq took out what looked

like a soft ball of fluffy material wrapped in a handkerchief.

‘A ball of wool! You want me to knit you a pair of socks.
Well, I won’t. I have better things to do.’

‘Like what ?’ said Ishaq.

‘Like …’ began Tasneem, then was silent. She glanced
uncomfortably at a long mirror on the wall. What did she do ?
Cut vegetables to help the cook, talk to her sister, read novels,
gossip with the maid, think about life. But before

154••,

she could meditate too deeply on the subject, the ball moved,
and her eyes lit up with pleasure.

‘So you see -‘ said Ishaq, ‘it’s a mouse.’

‘It is not -‘ said Tasneem with contempt. ‘It’s a bird. I’m not a
child, you know.’

‘And I’m not exactly your brother, you know,’ said Ishaq. He
unwrapped the parakeet and they looked at it together. Then he
placed it on a table near a red lacquer vase. The stubbly ball of
flesh looked quite disgusting.

‘How lovely,’ said Tasneem.

‘I selected him this morning,’ said Ishaq. ‘It took me hours,
but I wanted to have one that would be just right for you.’

Tasneem gazed at the bird, then stretched out her hand and
touched it. Despite its stubble it was very soft. Its colour was

very slightly green, as its feathers had only just begun to
emerge.

‘A parakeet ?’

‘Yes, but not a regular one. He’s a hill parakeet. He’ll talk as
well as a myna.’

When Mohsina Bai died, her highly talkative myna had
quickly followed her. Tasneem had been even lonelier without
the bird, but she was glad that Ishaq had not got her another
myna but something quite different. That was doubly
considerate of him.

‘What is he called?’

Ishaq laughed. ‘Why do you want to call him anything ? Just
“tota” will do. He’s not a warhorse that he should be called
Ruksh or Bucephalas.’

Both of them were standing and looking at the baby parakeet.
At the same moment each stretched out a hand to touch him.
Tasneem swiftly drew her hand back.

‘You go ahead,’ said Ishaq. ‘I’ve had him all day.’

‘Has he eaten anything ?’

‘A bit of flour mixed with water,’ said Ishaq.

‘How do they get such tiny birds ?’ asked Tasneem.

Their eyes were level, and Ishaq, looking at her head, covered
with a yellow scarf, found himself speaking without paying
any attention to his words.

155’Oh, they’re taken from their nests when they’re very
young - if you don’t get them young they don’t learn to speak and you should get a male one - he’ll develop a lovely roseand-black ring around his neck - and males are more
intelligent. The best talkers come from the foothills, you know.
There were three of them in the stall from the same nest, and I
had to think quite hard before I decided -‘

‘You mean, he’s separated from his brothers and sisters ?’
Tasneem broke in.

‘But of course,’ said Ishaq. ‘He had to be. If you get a pair of
them, they don’t learn to imitate anything we say.’

‘How cruel,’ said Tasneem. Her eyes grew moist.

‘But he had already been taken from his nest when I bought
him,’ said Ishaq, upset that he had caused her pain. ‘You can’t
put them back or they’ll be rejected by their parents.’ He put
his hand on hers - she didn’t draw back at once - and said :
‘Now it’s up to you to give him a good life. Put him in a nest
of cloth in the cage in which your mother’s myna used to be
kept. And for the first few days feed him a little parched gram
flour moistened with water or a little daal soaked overnight. If
he doesn’t like that cage, I’ll get him another one.’

Tasneem withdrew her hand gently from under Ishaq’s. Poor
parakeet, loved and unfree! He could change one cage for
another. And she would change these four walls for a different
four. Her sister, fifteen years her senior, and experienced in the
ways of the world, would arrange all that soon enough. And
then -

‘Sometimes I wish I could fly ‘ She stopped,

embarrassed.

Ishaq looked at her seriously. ‘It is a good thing we can’t,
Tasneem - or can you imagine the confusion ? The police have
a hard enough time controlling traffic in Chowk - but if we
could fly as well as walk it would be a hundred times worse.’

Tasneem tried not to smile.

‘But it would be worse still if birds, like us, could only walk,’
continued Ishaq. ‘Imagine them strolling up and down
Nabiganj with their walking-sticks in the evenings.’

156Now she was laughing. Ishaq too started laughing, and

the two of them, delighted by the picture they had conjured

* up, felt the tears rolling down their cheeks. Ishaq wiped his

away with his hand, Tasneem hers with her yellow dupatta.

Their laughter sounded through the house.

The baby parakeet sat quite still on the table-top near the red
lacquer vase ; his translucent gullet worked up and down.

v^ Saeeda Bai, roused from her afternoon nap, came into *the
room, and in a surprised voice, with something of a stern edge,
said : ‘Ishaq - what’s all this ? Is one not to be permitted to rest
even in the afternoon?’ Then her eyes alighted on the baby
parakeet, and she clicked her tongue in irritation.

‘No - no more birds in this house. That miserable myna of my
mother’s caused me enough trouble.’ She paused, then added:
‘One singer is enough in any establishment. Get rid of it.’

2.16

NO ONE spoke. After a while Saeeda Bai broke the silence.
‘Ishaq, you are here early,’ she said.

Ishaq looked guilty. Tasneem looked down with half a sob.
The parakeet made a feeble attempt to move. Saeeda Bai,
looking from one to the other, suddenly said :

‘Where is your sarangi anyway ?’

Ishaq realized he had not even brought it. He flushed.

‘I forgot. I was thinking of the parakeet.’

‘Well ?’

‘Of course I’ll go and get it immediately.’

‘The Raja of Marh has sent word he will be coming this
evening.’

‘I’m just going,’ said Ishaq. Then he added, looking at
Tasneem, ‘Shall I take the parakeet ?’

‘No, no -‘ said Saeeda Bai, ‘why should you want to take it ?
Just get your sarangi. And don’t be all day about it.’

157Ishaq left hurriedly.

Tasneem, who had been close to tears, looked gratefully at her
sister. Saeeda Bai, however, was far away. The business of the
bird had woken her up from a haunting and peculiar dream
involving the death of her mother and her own earlier life and when Ishaq left, its atmosphere of dread and even guilt
had surged back over her.

Tasneem, noticing her sister suddenly sad, held her hand.

‘What’s the matter, Apa?’ she asked, using the term of
endearment and respect she always used for her elder sister.

Saeeda Bai began to sob, and hugged Tasneem to her, kissing
her forehead and cheeks.

‘You are the only thing I care for in the world,’ she said. ‘May
God keep you happy ‘

Tasneem hugged her and said, ‘Why, Apa, why are you
crying? Why are you so overwrought? Is it Ammi-jaan’s grave
you are thinking of ?’

‘Yes, yes,’ said Saeeda Bai quickly, and turned away. ‘Now go
inside, get the cage lying in Ammi-jaan’s old room. Polish it
and bring it here. And soak some daal some chané ki daal - for
him to eat later.’

Tasneem went in towards the kitchen. Saeeda Bai sat down,
looking a bit dazed. Then she held the small parakeet in her
hands to keep him warm. She was sitting like this when the
maidservant came in to announce that someone had arrived
from the Nawab Sahib’s place, and was waiting outside.

Saeeda Bai pulled herself together and dried her eyes. ‘Let him
in,’ she said.

But when Firoz walked in, handsome and smiling, gripping his
elegant walking-stick lightly in his right hand, she gave a
startled gasp.

‘You ?’

‘Yes,’ said Firoz. ‘I’ve brought an envelope from my father.’

‘You’ve come late I mean, he usually sends someone

in the morning,’ murmured Saeeda Bai, trying to still the
confusion in her mind. ‘Please sit down, please sit down.’

158Until now the Nawab Sahib had sent a servant with the
monthly envelope. For the last two months, Saeeda Bai
remembered it had been just a couple of days after her period.
And this month too, of course….

Her thoughts were interrupted by Firoz, who said : ‘I happened
to bump into my father’s private secretary, who was coming -‘

‘Yes, yes.’ Saeeda Bai looked upset. Firoz wondered why
••y^his appearance should have distressed her so much. That
many years ago there must have been something between the
Nawab Sahib and Saeeda Bai’s mother - and that his father
continued to send a little something each month to support the
family - surely there was nothing in this to cause her such
agitation. Then he realized that she must have been upset even
before his arrival by something quite different.

I have come at a bad time, he thought, and decided to go.

Tasneem walked in with the copper birdcage and, seeing him,
suddenly stopped.

They looked at each other. For Tasneem, Firoz was just
another handsome admirer of her sister’s - but startlingly so.

She lowered her eyes quickly, then looked at him again.

She stood there with her yellow dupatta, the birdcage in her
right hand, her mouth slightly open in astonishment perhaps at
his astonishment. Firoz was staring at her, transfixed.

‘Have we met before ?’ he asked gently, his heart beating fast.

Tasneem was about to reply when Saeeda Bai said, ‘Whenever
my sister goes out of the house she goes in purdah. And this is
the first time that the Nawabzada has graced my poor lodgings
with his presence. So it is not possible that you could have
met. Tasneem, put the cage down, and go back to your Arabic
exercises. I have not got you a new teacher for nothing.’

‘But…’ began Tasneem.

‘Go back to your room at once. I will take care of the bird.
Have you soaked the daal yet ?’

‘I…’

159’Go and do so immediately. Do you want the bird to starve
?’

When the bewildered Tasneem had left, Firoz tried to orient
his thoughts. His mouth was dry. He felt strangely disturbed.
Surely, he felt, even if we have not met on this mortal plane,
we have met in some former life. The thought, counter to the
religion he nominally adhered to, affected him the more
powerfully for all that. The girl with the birdcage had in a few

short moments made the most profound and unsettling
impression on him.

After abridged pleasantries with Saeeda Bai, who seemed to
be paying as little attention to his words as he to hers, he
walked slowly out of the door.

Saeeda Bai sat perfectly still on the sofa for a few minutes.
Her hands still cradled the little parakeet gently. He appeared
to have gone off to sleep. She wrapped him up warmly in a
piece of cloth and set him down near the red vase again. From
outside she heard the call to evening prayer, and she covered
her head.

All over India, all over the world, as the sun or the shadow of
darkness moves from east to west, the call to prayer moves
with it, and people kneel down in a wave to pray to God. Five
waves each day - one for each namaaz ripple across the globe
from longitude to longitude. The component elements change
direction, like iron filings near a magnet - towards the house of
God in Mecca. Saeeda Bai got up to go to an inner room
where she performed the ritual ablution and began her prayers
:

In the Name of God, the Merciful, the Compassionate

Praise belongs to God, the Lord of all Being, the All-Merciful,
the All-Compassionate,

the Master of the Day of Doom. Thee only we serve ; to Thee
alone we pray for succour.

Guide us in the straight path, the path of those whom Thou
hast blessed,

not those against whom Thou art wrathful,

nor of those who are astray.

160But through this, and through her subsequent kneelings
and prostrations, one terrifying line from the Holy Book
recurred again and again to her mind :

And God alone knows what you keep secret and what you
publish.

‘«_»• t in six months. Sanitation, drinking water, electricity,
paving, civic sense - it was simply a question of making
sensible decisions and having the requisite facilities to
implement them. Haresh was as keen on ‘requisite facilities’
as he was on his ‘To Do’ list. He was impatient with himself if
anything was lacking in the former or undone in the latter. He
also believed in ‘following things through’.

Oh yes; Kedarnath’s son, what’s his name now, Bhaskar! he
said to himself. I should have got Dr Durrani’s address from
Sunil last night. He frowned at his own lack of foresight.

But after lunch he collected Bhaskar anyway and took a tonga
to Sunil’s. Dr Durrani looked as if he had walked to Sunil’s
house, reflected Haresh, so he couldn’t live all that far away.

Bhaskar accompanied Haresh in silence, and Haresh, for his
own part, was happy not to say anything other than where they
were going.

Sunil’s faithful, lazy servant pointed out Dr Durrani’s house,
which was a few doors away. Haresh paid off the tonga, and
walked over with Bhaskar.

4.10

A tall, good-looking fellow in cricket whites opened the door.

‘We’ve come to see Dr Durrani,’ said Haresh. ‘Do you think
he might be free ?’

‘I’ll just see what my father is doing,’ said the young

2-99man in a low, pleasant, slightly rough-edged voice.
‘Please come in.“

A minute or two later he emerged and said, ‘My father will be
out in a minute. He asked me who you were, and I realized I
hadn’t asked. I’m sorry, I should introduce myself first. My
name’s Kabir.’

Haresh, impressed by the young man’s looks and manner, held
out his hand, smiled in a clipped sort of way, and introduced
himself. ‘And this is Bhaskar, a friend’s son.’

The young man seemed a bit troubled about something, but
did his best to make conversation.

‘Hello, Bhaskar,’ said Kabir. ‘How old are you ?’

‘Nine,’ said Bhaskar, not objecting to this least original of
questions. He was pondering what all this was about.

After a while Kabir said, ‘I wonder what’s keeping my father,’
and went back in.

When Dr Durrani finally came into the drawing room, he was
quite surprised to see his visitors. Noticing Bhaskar, he asked
Haresh :

‘Have you come to see one of my, er, sons ?’

Bhaskar’s eyes lit up at this unusual adult behaviour. He liked
Dr Durrani’s strong, square face, and in particular the balance
and symmetry of his magnificent white moustache. Haresh,
who had stood up, said:

‘No indeed, Dr Durrani, it’s you we’ve come to see. I don’t
know if you remember me - we met at Sunil’s party.

‘Sunil ?’ said Dr Durrani, his eyes scrunched up in utter
perplexity, his eyebrows working up and down. ‘Sunil …
Sunil …’ He seemed to be weighing something up with great
seriousness, and coming closer and closer to a conclusion.
‘Patwardhan,’ he said, with the air of having arrived at a

considerable insight. He appraised this new premise from
several angles in silence.

Haresh decided to speed up the process. He said, rather briskly
:

‘Dr Durrani, you said that we could drop in to see you. This is
my young friend Bhaskar, whom I told you about. I

300think his interest in mathematics is remarkable, and I felt
he should meet you.’

Dr Durrani looked quite pleased, and asked Bhaskar what two
plus two was.

Haresh was taken aback, but Bhaskar - though he normally
rejected considerably more complex sums as unworthy of his
attention - was not, apparently, insulted. In a very tentative
voice he replied :

‘Four?’

Dr Durrani was silent. He appeared to be mulling over this
answer. Haresh began to feel ill at ease.

‘Well, yes, you can, er, leave him here for a while,’ said Dr
Durrani.

‘Shall I come back to pick him up at four o’clock?’ asked
Haresh.

‘More or less,’ said Dr Durrani.

When he and Bhaskar were left alone, both of them were
silent. After a while, Bhaskar said :

‘Was that the right answer ?’

‘More or less,’ said Dr Durrani. ‘You see,’ he said, picking up
a musammi from a bowl on the dining table, ‘it’s rather, er, it’s
rather like the question of the, er, sum of the angles in a - in a
triangle. What have they, er, taught you that is ?’

‘180 degrees,’ said Bhaskar.

‘Well, more or less,’ said Dr Durrani. ‘On the, er, surface of it,
at least. But on the surface of this, er, musammi, for instance -‘

For a while he gazed at the green citrus, following a
mysterious train of thought. Once it had served his purpose, he
looked at it wonderingly, as if he could not figure out what it
was doing in his hand. He peeled it with some difficulty
because of its thick skin and began to eat it.

‘Would you, er, like some ?’ he asked Bhaskar matter-offactly.

‘Yes, please,’ said Bhaskar, and held out both hands for a
segment, as if he were receiving a sanctified offering from a
temple.

An hour later, when Haresh returned, he got the sense

301that he was an unwelcome interruption. They were now
both sitting at the dining table, on which were lying among
other things - several musammis, several peels of musammis, a
large number of toothpicks in various configurations, an
inverted ashtray, some strips of newspaper stuck together in
odd-looking twisted loops, and a purple kite. The remaining
surface of the dining room table was covered with equations in
yellow chalk.

Before Bhaskar left with Haresh, he took with him the loops of
newspaper, the purple kite, and exactly sixteen toothpicks.
Neither Dr Durrani nor Bhaskar thanked each other for the
time they had spent together. In the tonga back to Misri Mandi,
Haresh could not resist asking Bhaskar:

‘Did you understand all those equations ?’

‘No,’ said Bhaskar. It was clear from the tone of his answer,
however, that he did not think this mattered.

Though Bhaskar did not say anything when he got home, his
mother could tell from one glance at his face that he had had a
wonderfully stimulating time. She took his various objects off
him and told him to wash his gummy hands. Then, almost with
tears in her eyes, she thanked Haresh.

‘It’s so kind of you to have taken this trouble, Haresh Bhai. I
can tell what this has meant to him,’ Veena said.

‘Well,’ said Haresh with a smile, ‘that’s more than I

can.

4.11

MEANWHILE, the brogues were sitting on their lasts in Jagat
Ram’s workshop. Two days passed. On the appointed day at
two o’clock, Haresh came to collect the shoes and the lasts.
Jagat Ram’s little daughter recognized him, and clapped her
hands at his arrival. She was entertaining herself with a song,
and since he was there, she entertained him too. The song went
as follows :

302Ram Ram Shah, Ram Ram Shah,

Alu ka rasa, Gravy made from spuds,

Mendaki ki chatni- Chutney made from female frog-

Aa gaya nasha! Drink it, and you’re drunk!

Haresh looked the shoes over with a practised eye. They were
well made. The uppers had been stitched excellently, though
on the simple sewing machine in front of him. The lasting had
been carefully done - there were no bubbles or wrinkles. The

finishing was fine, down to the coloration of the leather of the
punched brogue. He was well pleased. He had been strict in
his demands, but now he gave Jagat Ram one-and-a-half times
as much as he had promised him by way of payment.

‘You will be hearing from me,’ he promised.

‘Well, Haresh Sahib, I certainly hope so,’ said Jagat Ram.
‘You’re really leaving today? A pity.’

‘Yes, I’m afraid so.’

‘And you stayed on just for this ?’

‘Yes, I would have left in two days instead of four otherwise.’

‘Well, I hope they like this pair at CLFC.’

With that they parted. Haresh did a few chores, made a few
small purchases, went back to Sunil’s, returned his brogues,
packed, said goodbye, and took a tonga to the station to catch
the evening train to Kanpur. On the way he stopped at
Kedarnath’s to thank him.

‘I hope I can be of some help to you,’ said Haresh, shaking his
hand warmly.

‘You already have, Veena tells me.’

‘I meant, by way of business.’

‘I certainly hope so,’ said Kedarnath. ‘And, well, if I can help
you in any way -‘

They shook hands.

‘Tell me -‘ said Haresh suddenly. ‘I have been meaning to ask
you this for several days now - how did you get all those scars
on the inside of your hands ? They don’t look as if they’ve
been caught in a machine - they’d be scarred on both sides if
they had.’

Kedarnath was silent for a few seconds, as if adjusting

303to a change of thought. ‘I got those during Partition,’ he
said. He paused and continued, ‘At the time that we were
forced to flee from Lahore, I got a place in a convoy of army
trucks and we got into the first truck - my younger brother and
I. Nothing, I thought, could be safer. But, well, it was a
Baluchi regiment. They stopped just before the Ravi Bridge,
and Muslim ruffians came from behind the timber yards there
and started butchering us with their spears. My younger
brother has marks on his back and I have these on my palms
and my wrist - I tried to hold onto the blade of the spear…. I
was in hospital for a month.’

Haresh’s face betrayed his shock. Kedarnath continued,
closing his eyes, but in a calm voice :

‘Twenty or thirty people were slaughtered in two minutes someone’s father, someone’s daughter By the

greatest of luck a Gurkha regiment was coming from the other
side and they began to fire. And, well, the looters fled, and I’m
here to tell you the story.’

‘Where was the family ?’ asked Haresh. ‘In the other trucks ?’

‘No - I’d sent them on by train a little earlier. Bhaskar was
only six at the time. Not that the trains were safe either, as you
know.’

‘I don’t know if I should have asked these questions,’ said
Haresh, feeling atypically embarrassed.

‘No, no - that’s all right. We were fortunate, as these things go.
The Muslim trader who used to own my shop here in
Brahmpur - well…. Strange, though - after all that happened
there, I still miss Lahore,’ said Kedarnath. ‘But you’d better
hurry or you’ll miss your train.’

Brahmpur Junction was as crowded and noisy and smelly as
ever: hissing clouds of steam, the whistles of incoming trains,
hawkers’ shouts, the stench of fish, the buzz of flies, the
scurrying babble of passengers. Haresh felt tired. Though it
was past six o’clock it was still very warm. He touched an
agate cuff-link and wondered at its coolness.

Glancing at the crowd, he noticed a young woman in a light
blue cotton sari standing near her mother. The English

304teacher whom he had met at Sunil’s party was seeing them
off on the down train to Calcutta. The mother’s back was
turned towards Haresh, so he could not get a proper glimpse of
her. The daughter’s face was striking. It was not classically
beautiful - it did not catch at his heart as did the photograph he
kept with him - but it had a quality of such attractive intensity
that Haresh stopped for a second. The young woman seemed
to be determinedly fighting back some sadness that went
beyond the normal sadness of parting at a railway platform.
Haresh thought of pausing for a little to re-introduce himself to
the young lecturer, but something in the girl’s expression of
inwardness, almost despair, stopped him from doing so.
Besides, his train was leaving soon, his coolie was already
quite far ahead of him, and Haresh, not being tall, was
concerned that he might lose him in the crowd.

305Part Five5.1

SOME riots are caused, some bring themselves into being. The
problems at Misri Mandi were not expected to reach a point of
violence. A few days after Haresh left, however, the heart of
Misri Mandi - including the area around Kedarnath’s shop was full of armed police.

The previous evening there had been a fight inside a cheap
drinking place along the unpaved road that led towards the
tannery from Old Brahmpur. The strike meant less money but
more time for everyone, so the kalari’s joint was about as
crowded as usual. The place was mainly frequented by jatavs,
but not exclusively so. Drink equalized the drinkers, and they
didn’t care who was sitting at the plain wooden table next to
them. They drank, laughed, cried, then tottered and staggered
out, sometimes singing, sometimes cursing. They swore
undying friendship, they divulged confidences, they imagined
insults. The assistant of a trader in Misri Mandi was in a foul
mood because he was having a hard time with his father-in-

law. He was drinking alone and working himself into a
generalized state of aggressiveness. He overheard a comment
from behind him about the sharp practice of his employer, and
his hands clenched into a fist. Knocking his bench over as he
twisted around to see who was speaking, he fell onto the floor.

The three men at the table behind him laughed. They were
jatavs who had dealt with him before. It was he who used to
take the shoes from their baskets when they scurried
desperately in the evening to Misri Mandi - his employer the
trader did not like to touch shoes because he felt they would
pollute him. The jatavs knew that the breakdown of the trade
in Misri Mandi had particularly hurt those traders who had
overextended themselves on the chit system. That it had hurt
themselves still more, they also knew - but for them it was not
a case of the mighty being brought to their knees. Here,
however, literally in front of them, it was.

The locally-distilled cheap alcohol had gone to their

309heads, and they did not have the money to buy the pakoras
and other snacks that could have settled it. They laughed
uncontrollably.

‘He’s wrestling with the air,’ jeered one.

‘I bet he’d rather be doing another kind of wrestling,’ sneered
another.

‘But would he be any good at it ? They say that’s why he has
trouble at home -‘

‘What a reject,’ taunted the first man, waving him away with
the airy gesture of a trader rejecting a basket on the basis of a
single faulty pair.

Their speech was slurred, their eyes contemptuous. The man
who had fallen lunged at them, and they set upon him. A
couple of people, including the owner or kalari, tried to make
peace, but most gathered around to enjoy the fun and shout
drunken encouragement. The four rolled around on the floor,
fighting.

It ended with the man who had started the fight being beaten
unconscious, and all of the others being injured. One was
bleeding from the eye and screaming in pain.

That night, when he lost the sight of his eye, an ominous
crowd of jatavs gathered at the/Govind Shoe Mart, where the
trader had his stall. They/round the stall closed. The crowd
began to shout slogans, then threatened to burn the stall down.
One of the other traders tried to reason with the crowd, and
they set upon him. A couple of policemen, sensing the crowd’s
mood, ran to the local police station for reinforcements. Ten
policemen now emerged, armed with short stout bamboo
lathis, and they began to beat people up indiscriminately. The
crowd scattered.

Surprisingly soon, every relevant authority knew about the
matter : from the Superintendent of Police of the district to the
Inspector-General of Purva Pradesh, from the Home Secretary
to the Home Minister. Everyone received different facts and
interpretations, and had different suggestions for action or
inaction.

The Chief Minister was out of town. In his absence and
because law and order lay in his domain - the Home Minister
ran things. Mahesh Kapoor, though Revenue

310Minister, and not therefore directly concerned, heard about
the unrest because part of Misri Mandi lay in his constituency.
He hurried to the spot and talked with the Superintendent of
Police and the District Magistrate. The SP and the DM
believed that things would blow over if neither side was
provoked. However, the Home Minister, L.N. Agarwal, part of
whose constituency also lay in Misri Mandi, did not think it
necessary to go to the spot. He ‘^5, received a number of
phone calls at home and decided that something by way of a
salutary example needed to be provided.

These jatavs had disrupted the trade of the city long enough
with their frivolous complaints and their mischievous strike.
They had doubtless been stirred up by union leaders. Now they
were threatening to block the entrance of the Govind Shoe
Mart at the point where it joined the main road of Misri
Mandi. Many traders there were already in financial straits.
The threatened picketing would finish them off. L.N. Agarwal
himself came from a shopkeeping family and some of the
traders were good friends of his. Others supplied him with
election funds. He had received three desperate calls from
them. It was a time not for talk but for action. It was not
merely a question of law, but of order, the order of society
itself. Surely this is what the Iron Man of India, the late Sardar
Patel, would have felt in his place.

f. But what would he have done had he been here ? As if

B| in a dream, the Home Minister conjured up the domed IL
and severe head of his political mentor, dead these four ^B
months. He sat in thought for a while. Then he told his ^B

personal assistant to get him the District Magistrate on the ^B
phone.

^B The District Magistrate, who was in his mid-thirties, ™’:
was directly in charge of the civil administration of Brahmpur
District and, together with the SP - as the Superintendent of
Police was referred to by everyone - maintained law and order.

The PA tried to get through, then said: ‘Sorry, Sir, DM is out
on the site. He is trying to conciliate -‘

311’Give me the phone,’ said the Home Minister in a calm
voice. The PA nervously handed him the receiver.

‘Who ? … Where ? … I am Agarwal speaking, that’s who …
yes, direct instructions … I don’t care. Get Dayal at once. …
Yes, ten minutes … call me back. … The SP is there, that is
enough surely, is it a cinema show ?’

He put down the phone and grasped the grey curls that curved
like a horse-shoe around his otherwise bald head.

After a while he made as if to pick up the receiver again, then
decided against it, and turned his attention to a file.

Ten minutes later the young District Magistrate, Krishan
Dayal, was on the phone. The Home Minister told him to
guard the entrance of the Govind Shoe Mart. He was to
disperse any pickets forthwith, if necessary by reading out
Section 144 of the Criminal Procedure Code - and then firing
if the crowd did not disperse.

The line was unclear but the message disturbingly clear.
Krishan Dayal said in a strong voice, but one which was
fraught with concern: ‘Sir, with respect, may I suggest an
alternative course of action. We are talking with the leaders of
the crowd -‘

‘So there are leaders, are there, it is not spontaneous ?’

‘Sir, it is spontaneous, but there are leaders.’

I.JSI -A^car.waJ J-efkcred ±hat it was puppies of the ilk of
Krishan Dayal who used to lock him up in British jails. He
said, calmly :

‘Are you being witty, Mr Dayal ?’

‘No, Sir, I -‘

‘You have your instructions. This is an emergency. I have
discussed things with the Chief Secretary by phone. I
understand that the crowd is some three hundred strong. I want
the SP to get the police stationed everywhere along the main
road of Misri Mandi and to guard all entrances Govind Shoe
Mart, Brahmpur Shoe Mart, and so on - you just do the
needful.’

There was a pause. The Home Minister was about to put down
the phone when the DM said :

‘Sir, we may not be able to spare such a large number of police
at short notice. A number of policemen are stationed

f

312.at the site of the Shiva Temple in case of trouble. Things
are very tense, Sir. The Revenue Minister thinks that on Friday
-‘

‘Are they there at the moment? I did not notice them this
morning,’ said L.N. Agarwal in a relaxed but steely tone.

‘No, Sir, but they are in the main police station in the Chowk
area, so it is sufficiently close to the temple site. It is best to
keep them there for a true emergency.’ Krishan Dayal had
been in the army during the war, but he was rattled by the
Home Minister’s calm air of almost dismissive interrogation
and command.

‘God will take care of the Shiva Temple. I am in close touch
with many members of the committee, do you think I do not
know the circumstances?’ He had been irked by Dayal’s
reference to ‘a true emergency’ as much as by his mention of
Mahesh Kapoor, his rival and - as abrasive chance would have
it - the MLA from the constituency contiguous to his own.

‘Yes, Sir,’ said Krishan Dayal, his face reddening which
luckily the Home Minister could not see. ‘And may I know
how long the police are to remain there ?’

‘Until further notice,’ said the Home Minister and put down
the phone to pre-empt further backchat. He did not like the

way these so-called civil servants answered back to those
above them in the chain of command - who were besides,
twenty years older than them. It was necessary to have an
administrative service, no doubt, but it was equally necessary
that it should learn that it no longer ruled this country.

5.2

ON Friday at the midday prayer the hereditary Imam of the
Alamgiri Mosque gave his sermon. He was a short, plump
man with short breath, but this did not stem his jerky
crescendos of oratory. If anything, his breathlessness gave the
impression that he was choked with emotion. The

313construction of the Shiva Temple was going ahead. The
Imam’s appeals to everyone from the Governor down had
fallen on deaf ears. A legal case contesting the Raja of Marh’s
title to the land contiguous to the mosque had been instituted
and was at present going through the lowest court. A stay
order on the construction of the temple, however, could not be
immediately obtained - indeed, perhaps could not be obtained
at all. Meanwhile the dungheap was growing before the
Imam’s agonized eyes.

His congregation was tense already. It was with dismay that
many Muslims in Brahmpur had, over the months, seen the
foundations of the temple rising in the plot to the west of their
mosque. Now, after the first part of the prayers, the Imam gave
his audience the most stirring and inflammatory speech he had
given in years, very far removed from his ordinary sermon on
personal morality or cleanliness or alms or piety. His grief and
frustration as much as their own bitter anxiety called for
something stronger. Their religion was in danger. The
barbarians were at the gates. They prayed, these infidels, to
their pictures and stones and perpetuated themselves in

ignorance and sin. Let them do what they wanted to in their
dens of filth. But God could see what was happening now.
They had brought their beastliness near the very precincts of
the mosque itself. The land that the kafirs sought to build on why sought? were at this very moment building on - was
disputed land - disputed in God’s eyes and in man’s eyes - but
not in the eyes of animals who spent their time blowing
conches and worshipping parts of the body whose very names
it was shameful to mention. Did the people of the faith
gathered here in God’s presence know how it was planned to
consecrate this Shiva-linga? Naked ash-smeared savages
would dance before it - naked! These were the shameless, like
the people of Sodom, who mocked at the power of the AllMerciful.

… God guides not the people of the unbelievers.

314Those - God has set a seal on their hearts, and their
hearing, and their eyes,

I and those - they are the heedless ones ;

| Without a doubt, in the world to come they

will be the losers.

They worshipped their hundreds of idols that they claimed
were divine - idols with four heads and five heads and the
heads of elephants - and now the infidels who held power •*
“» in the land wanted Muslims, when they turned their faces
westwards in prayer to the Kaaba, to face these same idols and
these same obscene objects with their heads bowed. ‘But,’
continued the Imam, ‘we who have lived through hard and

bitter times and have suffered for our faith and paid for our
faith in blood need only remember the fate of the idolaters :

I And they set up compeers to God, that

•- they might lead astray from His way.

H Say : “Take your joy! Your homecoming I shall be -the
Fire!”’

I

ï A slow, attentive, shocked expectation filled the silence

•L that followed.

^B ‘But even now,’ cried the Imam in renewed frenzy, half^H
gasping for air, ‘even as I speak - they could be hatching ^B
their designs to prevent our evening devotion by blowing IK
their conches to drown out the call to prayer. Ignorant they
may be, but they are full of guile. They are already getting rid
of Muslims in the police force so that the community of God
will be left defenceless. Then they can attack and enslave us.
Now it is too clear to us that we are living not in a land of
protection but a land of enmity. We have appealed for justice,
and have been kicked down at the very doors where we have
gone pleading. The Home Minister himself supports this
temple committee - and its guiding spirit is the debauched
buffalo of Marh! Let it not happen that our holy places are to
be polluted by the proximity of filth - let it not happen - but
what can save us now that we are left defenceless before the
sword of our

315enemies in the land of the Hindus, what can save us but
our own efforts, our own’ - here he struggled for breath and
emphasis again - ‘our own direct action - to protect ourselves.
And not just ourselves, not just our families but these few feet
of paved earth that have been given to us for centuries, where
we have unrolled our mats and raised our hands in tears to the
All-Powerful, which are worn smooth | by the devotions of our
ancestors and ourselves and - if I God so wills - will so be by
our descendants also. But have ] no fear, God does so will,
have no fear, God will be with!

you: i

Hast thou not seen how thy Lord did with Ad, 1

Iram of the pillars, 1

the like of which was never created in the land, |

and Thamood, who hollowed the rocks in the valley, 1

and Pharaoh, he of the tent-pegs, 3

who all were insolent in the land J

and worked much corruption therein? 1

Thy Lord unloosed on them a scourge of chastisement;

surely thy Lord is ever on the watch. j

O God, help those who help the religion of the Prophet 1
Muhammad, peace be upon Him. May we also do the “ same.
Make those weak, who weaken the religion of Muhammad.
Praise be to God, the Lord of all Being.’

The plump Imam descended from the pulpit, and led the
people in more prayer.

That evening there was a riot.

5.3

BECAUSE of the instructions of the Home Minister, the
greater part of the police was stationed at sensitive points in
Misri Mandi. There were only about fifteen policemen left in
the main police station in Chowk by evening. As the call for
prayer from the Alamgiri Mosque trembled across the evening
sky, by some unfortunate chance or possibly

316I

intentional provocation, the sound of a conch was heard
interrupting it several times. Normally such a thing might have
been angrily shrugged off, but not today.

No one knew how the men who were gathering in the narrow
alleys of the Muslim neighbourhood that lay on one side of

Chowk became a mob. One moment they were walking
individually or in small groups through the alleys towards the
mosque for evening prayer, then they had coalesced into larger
clusters, excitedly discussing the ominous signals they had
heard. After the midday sermon most were in no mood to
listen to any voice of moderation. A couple of the more eager
members of the Alamgiri Masjid Hifaazat Committee made a
few crowd-rousing remarks, a few local hotheads and toughs
stirred themselves and those around them into a state of rage,
the crowd increased in size as the alleys joined into larger
alleys, its density and speed and sense of indistinct
determination increased, and it was no longer a collection but
a thing wounded and enraged, and wanting nothing less than to
wound and enrage. There were cries of ‘Allah-u-Akbar’ which
could be heard all the way to the police station. A few of those
who joined the crowd had sticks in their hands. One or two
even had knives. Now it was not the mosque that they were
headed for but the partly constructed temple just next to it. It
was from here that the blasphemy had originated, it was this
that must be destroyed.

Since the Superintendent of Police of the district was occupied
in Misri Mandi, the young District Magistrate, Krishan Dayal,
had himself gone to the tall pink edifice of the main police
station about an hour earlier to ensure that things would
remain stable in the Chowk area. He feared the increased
tension that Friday often brought. When he heard about the
Imam’s sermon, he asked the kotwal - as the Deputy
Superintendent of Police for the City was called - what he
planned to do to protect the area.

The kotwal of Brahmpur, however, was a lazy man who
wanted nothing better than to be left alone to take his bribes in
peace.

317’There will be no trouble, Sir, believe me,’ he assured the
District Magistrate. ‘Agarwal Sahib himself has phoned me.
Now he tells me I am to go to Misri Mandi to join the SP - so I
must be off, Sir, with your leave, of course.’ And he bustled
off in a preoccupied sort of way, taking two other lower
officers with him, and leaving the kotwali virtually in the
charge of a head constable. ‘I will just be sending the Inspector
back,’ he said in a reassuring manner. ‘You should not stay,
Sir,’ he added ingratiatingly. ‘It is late. This is a peaceful time.
After the previous troubles at the mosque we have defused the
situation, I am glad to say.’

Krishan Dayal, left with a force of about twelve constables,
thought he would wait until the Inspector returned before he
decided whether to go home. His wife was used to him coming
back at odd hours, and would wait for him; it was not
necessary to phone her. He did not actually expect a riot; he
merely felt that tension was running high and that it was not
worth taking a chance. He believed that the Home Minister
had his priorities wrong where Chowk and Misri Mandi were
concerned; but then the Home Minister was arguably the most

powerful man in the state next to the Chief Minister, and he
himself was just a DM.

He was sitting and waiting in this unworried but uneasy frame
of mind when he heard what was to be recalled by several
policemen at the subsequent inquiry - the inquiry by a senior
officer that is required to be held after every magisterial order
to fire. First he heard the coinciding sounds of the conch and
the muezzin’s call to prayer. This worried him mildly, but the
reports he had had of the Imam’s speech had not included his
prescient reference to a conch. Then, after a while, came the
distant murmur of shouting voices interspersed by high cries.
Even before he could make out the individual syllables, he
could tell what was being shouted by the direction from which
it came and the general shape and fervour of the sound. He
sent a policeman to the top of the police station - it was three
storeys high - to judge where the mob now was. The mob

318itself would be invisible - hidden as it was by the
intervening houses of the labyrinthine alleys - but the direction
of the heads of the spectators from the rooftops would give its
position away. As the cries of ‘Allah-u-Akbar! Allah-uAkbar!’
came closer, the DM urgently told the small force of twelve
constables to stand with him in a line - rifles at the ready before the foundations and rudimentary walls of the site of the
Shiva Temple. The thought flashed through his mind that
despite his training in the army he had not learned to think
tactically in a terrain of urban lawlessness. Was there nothing
better he could do than to perform this mad sacrificial duty of
standing against a wall and facing overwhelming odds?

The constables under his effective command were Muslims
and Rajputs, mainly Muslims. The police force before
Partition was very largely composed of Muslims as the result
of the sound imperialist policy of divide and rule: it helped the
British that the predominantly Hindu Congress-wallahs should

be beaten up by predominantly Muslim policemen. Even after
the exodus to Pakistan in 1947 there were large numbers of
Muslims in the force. They would not be happy to fire upon
other

Muslims.

Krishan Dayal believed in general that although it was not
always necessary to give effect to maximum force, it was
necessary to give the impression that you were prepared to do
so. In a strong voice he told the policemen that they were to
fire when he gave the order. He himself stood there, pistol in
hand. But he felt more vulnerable than ever before in his life.
He told himself that a good officer, together with a force on
which he could absolutely rely, could almost always carry the
day, but he had reservations about the ‘absolutely’ ; and the
‘almost’ worried him. Once the mob, still a few alleys away,
came round the final bend, broke into a charge, and made
straight for the temple, the patently, pathetically ineffective
police force would be overwhelmed. A couple of men had just
come running to tell him that there were perhaps a thousand
men in the mob, that they were well-armed, and that -

319judging by their speed - they would be upon them in two
or three minutes.

Now that he knew he might be dead in a few minutes^ dead if
he fired, dead if he did not - the young DM gave his wife a
brief thought, then his parents, and finally an old schoolmaster
of his who had once confiscated a blue toy pistol that he had
brought to class. His wandering thoughts were brought back to
earth by the head constable who was addressing him urgently.
‘Sahib!’ ‘Yes - yes?’

‘Sahib - you are determined to shoot if necessary?’ The head
constable was a Muslim ; it must have struck him as strange
that he was about to die shooting Muslims in the course of
defending a half-built Hindu temple that was an affront to the
very mosque in which he himself often prayed.

‘What do you think?’ Krishan Dayal said in a voice that made
things quite clear. ‘Do I need to repeat my orders?’

‘Sahib, if you take my advice -‘ said the head constable
quickly, ‘we should not stand here where we will be
overpowered. We should stand in wait for them just before
they turn the last bend before the temple - and just as they turn
the bend we should charge and fire simultaneously. Th&y,
WOT,’^ %3(tfw ham many we are, ana they won’t know
what’s hit them. There’s a ninety-nine per cent chance they
will disperse.’

The astonished DM said to the head constable: ‘You should
have my job.’

He turned to the others, who appeared petrified. He
immediately ordered them to run with him towards the bend.
They stationed themselves on either side of the alley, about
twenty feet from the bend itself. The mob was less than a
minute away. He could hear it screaming and yelling; he could
feel the vibration of the ground as hundreds of feet rushed
forward.

At the last moment he gave the signal. The thirteen men roared
and charged and fired.

The wild and dangerous mob, hundreds strong, faced

32.0

t

Ifwith this sudden terror, halted, staggered, turned and fled. It
was uncanny. Within thirty seconds it had melted away. Two
bodies were left in the street: one young man had been shot
through the neck and was dying or dead; the other, an old man
with a white beard, had fallen and been crushed by the
retreating mob. He was badly, perhaps fatally, injured. Slippers
and sticks were scattered here and there. There was blood in
several places in the alley, so it • was apparent that there had
been other injuries, possibly deaths. Friends or members of
their families had probably dragged the bodies back into the
doorways of neighbouring houses. No one wanted to be
brought to the attention of the police.

The DM looked around at his men. A couple of them were
trembling, most of them were jubilant. None of them was
injured. He caught the head constable’s eye. Both of them
started laughing with relief, then stopped. A couple of women
were wailing in nearby houses. Otherwise, everything was
peaceful or, rather, still.

5.4

THE next day L.N. Agarwal visited his only child, his married
daughter Priya. He did so because he liked visiting her and her
husband, and also to escape from the panicstricken MLAs of
his faction who were desperately worried about the aftermath
of the firing in Chowk, and were making his life miserable
with their misery.

L.N. Agarwal’s daughter lived in Old Brahmpur in the Shahi
Darvaza area, not far from Misri Mandi where her childhood
friend Veena Tandon lived. Priya lived in a joint family which
included her husband’s brothers and their wives and children.
Her husband was Ram Vilas Goyal, a lawyer with a practice
concentrated mainly in the District Court - though he did
appear in the High Court from time to time. He worked mainly
on civil, not criminal cases. He was a placid, good-natured,
bland-featured man, sparing with his words, and with only a
mild interest in politics.

32.1Law and a little business on the side was enough for him ;
that and a calm family background and the peaceful ratchet of
routine, which he expected Priya to provide. His co£ leagues
respected him for his scrupulous honesty and hi’s slow but
clear-headed legal abilities. And his father-in-law the Home
Minister enjoyed talking to him : he maintained confidences,
refrained from giving advice, and had no passion for politics.

Priya Goyal for her part was a fiery spirit. Every morning,
winter or summer, she paced fiercely along the roof. It was a
long roof, since it covered three contiguous narrow houses,
connected lengthways at each of the three storeys. In effect the
whole operated as one large house, and was treated as such by
the family and the neighbours. It was known locally as the Rai
Bahadur’s house because Ram Vilas Goyal’s grandfather (still
alive at eighty-eight), who had been given that title by the
British, had bought and restructured the property half a
century ago.

On the ground floor were a number of store-rooms and the
servants’ quarters. On the floor above lived Ram Vilas’s
ancient grandfather, the Rai Bahadur; his father and
stepmother; and his sister. The common kitchen was also
located on this floor as was the puja room (which the unpious,

even impious Priya rarely visited). On the top floor were the
rooms, respectively, of the families of the three brothers; Ram
Vilas was the middle brother and he occupied the two rooms
of the top floor of the middle ‘house’. Above this was the roof
with its washing lines and water tanks.

When she paced up and down the roof, Priya Goyal would
picture herself as a panther in a cage. She would look
longingly towards the small house just a few minutes’ walk
away - and just visible through the jungle of intervening roofs
- in which her childhood friend Veena Tandon lived. Veena,
she knew, was not well off any longer, but she was free to do
as she pleased : to go to the market, to walk around by herself,
to go for music lessons. In Priya’s own household there was no
question of that. For a daughter-in-law from the house of the
Rai Bahadur to be

322.seen in the market would have been disgraceful. That she
was thirty-two years old with a girl of ten and a boy of eight
was irrelevant. Ram Vilas, ever placid, would have none of it.
It was simply not his way ; more importantly, it would cause
pain to his father and stepmother and grandfather and elder
brother - and Ram Vilas sincerely believed in maintaining the
decencies of a joint family.

Priya hated living in a joint family. She had never done so
until she came to live with the Goyals of Shahi Darvaza. This
was because her father, Lakshmi Narayan Agarwal, had been
the only son to survive to adulthood, and he in his turn had
only had the one daughter. When his wife died, he had been
stricken, and had taken the Gandhian vow of sexual
abstinence. He was a man of spartan habits. Although Home
Minister, he lived in two rooms in a hostel for Members of the
Legislative Assembly.

‘The first years of married life are the hardest - they require
the most adjustment,’ Priya had been told ; but she felt that in
some ways it was getting more and more intolerable as time
went on. Unlike Veena, she had no proper paternal - and more
importantly, maternal - home to run away to with her children
for at least a month a year - the prerogative of all married
women. Even her grandparents (with whom she had spent the
time when her father was in jail) were now dead. Her father
loved her dearly as his only child ; it was his love that had in a
sense spoiled her for the constrained life of the Goyal joint
family, for it had imbued her with a spirit of independence;
and now, living in austerity as he did, he could not himself
provide her with any refuge.

If her husband had not been so kind, she felt she would have
gone mad. He did not understand her but he was
understanding. He tried to make things easier for her in small
ways, and he never once raised his voice. Also, she liked the
ancient Rai Bahadur, her grandfather-in-law. There was a
spark to him. The rest of the family and particularly the
women - her mother-in-law, her husband’s sister, and her
husband’s elder brother’s wife - had done their best to make
her miserable as a young bride, and she

32.3could not stand them. But she had to pretend she did,
every day, all the time - except when she paced up and down
on the roof - where she was not even permitted to* have a
garden, on the grounds that it would attract mon-* keys. Ram
Vilas’s stepmother had even tried to dissuade her from her
daily to-ing and fro-ing (‘Just think, Priya, how will it look to
the neighbours?’), but for once Priya had refused to go along.
The sisters-in-law above whose heads she paced at dawn
reported her to their mother-inlaw. But perhaps the old witch
sensed that she had driven Priya to the limit, and did not
phrase her complaint in a direct manner again. Anything
indirect on the matter Priya chose not to understand.

L.N. Agarwal came dressed as always in an immaculately
starched (but not fancy) kurta, dhoti and Congress cap. Below
the white cap could be seen his curve of curly grey hair but not
the baldness it enclosed. Whenever he ventured out to Shahi
Darvaza he kept his cane handy to scare away the monkeys
that frequented, some would say dominated, the
neighbourhood. He dismissed his rickshaw near the local
market, and turned off the main road into a tiny side-lane
which opened out into a small square. In the middle of the
square was a large pipal tree. One entire side of the square was
the Rai Bahadur’s house.

The door below the stairs was kept closed because of the
monkeys, and he rapped on it with his cane. A couple of faces
appeared at the enclosed wrought-iron balconies of the floors
above. His daughter’s face lit up when she saw him ; she
quickly coiled her loose black hair into a bun and came
downstairs to open the door. Her father embraced her and they
went upstairs again.

‘And where has Vakil Sahib disappeared?’ he asked in Hindi.

He liked to refer to his son-in-law as the lawyer, although the
appellation was equally appropriate to Ram Vilas’s father and
grandfather.

‘He was here a minute ago,’ replied Priya, and got up to search
for him.

32.4

ft*

‘Don’t bother yet,’ said her father in a warm, relaxed voice.
‘First give me some tea.’

For a few minutes the Home Minister enjoyed home comforts
: well-made tea (not the useless stuff he got at the MLA
hostel) ; sweets and kachauris made by the women of his
daughter’s house - maybe by his daughter herself; some
minutes with his grandson and granddaughter, who preferred,
however, to play with their friends in the heat on the roof or
below in the square (his granddaughter was good at street
cricket) ; and a few words with his daughter, whom he saw
rarely enough and missed a great deal.

He had no compunction, as some fathers-in-law had, about
accepting food, drink and hospitality at his son-inlaw’s house.
He talked with Priya about his health and his grandchildren
and their schooling and character; about how Vakil Sahib was
working far too hard, a little about Priya’s mother in passing,
at the mention of whom a sadness came into both their eyes,
and about the antics of the old servants of the Goyal
household.

As they talked, other people passed the open door of the room,
saw them, and came in. They included Ram Vilas’s father,
rather a helpless character who was terrorized by his second
wife. Soon the whole Goyal clan had dropped by - except for
the Rai Bahadur, who did not like climbing stairs.

‘But where is Vakil Sahib?’ repeated L.N. Agarwal.

‘Oh,’ said someone, ‘he’s downstairs talking with the Rai
Bahadur. He knows you are in the house and he will come up
as soon as he is released.’

‘Why don’t I go down and pay my respects to the Rai Bahadur
now?’ said L.N. Agarwal, and got up.

Downstairs, grandfather and grandson were talking in the large
room that the Rai Bahadur had reserved as his own - mainly
because he was attached to the beautiful peacock tiles that
decorated the fireplace. L.N. Agarwal, being of the middle
generation, paid his respects and had respects paid to him.

‘Of course you’ll have tea?’ said the Rai Bahadur.

‘I’ve had some upstairs.”Since when have Leaders of the
People placed a limit on their tea-consumption?’ asked the Rai
Bahadur in a creaky and lucid voice. The word he used was
‘Neta-log’, whicrj had about the same level of mock deference
as ‘Vakil Sahib’.

‘Now, tell me,’ he continued, ‘what is all this killing you’ve
been doing in Chowk?’

It was not meant the way it sounded, it was merely the old Rai
Bahadur’s style of speech, but L.N. Agarwal could have done
without direct examination. He would probably get enough of
that on the floor of the House on Monday. What he would
have preferred was a quiet chat with his placid son-in-law, an
unloading of his troubled mind.

‘Nothing, nothing, it will all blow over,’ he said.

‘I heard that twenty Muslims were killed,’ said the old Rai
Bahadur philosophically.

‘No, not that many,’ said L.N. Agarwal. ‘A few. Matters are
well in hand.’ He paused, ruminating on the fact that he had
misjudged the situation. ‘This is a hard town to manage,’ he
continued. ‘If it isn’t one thing it’s another. We are an illdisciplined people. The lathi and the gun are the only things
that will teach us discipline.’

‘In British days law and order was not such a problem,’ said
the creaky voice.

The Home Minister did not rise to the Rai Bahadur’s bait. In
fact, he was not sure that the remark was not delivered
innocently.

‘Still, there it is,’ he responded.

‘Mahesh Kapoor’s daughter was here the other day,’ ventured
the Rai Bahadur.

Surely this could not be an innocent comment. Or was it?
Perhaps the Rai Bahadur was merely following a train of
thought.

‘Yes, she is a good girl,’ said L.N. Agarwal. He rubbed his
perimeter of hair in a thoughtful way. Then, after a pause, he
added calmly: ‘I can handle the town; it is not the tension that
disturbs me. Ten Misri Mandis and twenty Chowks are
nothing. It is the politics, the politicians - ‘

The Rai Bahadur allowed himself a smile. This too was

3z6somewhat creaky, as if the separate plates of his aged face
were gradually reconfiguring themselves with difficulty.

L.N. Agarwal shook his head, then went on. ‘Until two this
morning the MLAs were gathering around me like chicks
around their mother. They were in a state of panic. The Chief
Minister goes out of town for a few days and see what happens
in his absence! What will Sharmaji say when he comes back?
What capital will Mahesh Kapoor’s faction make out of all
this? In Misri Mandi they will emphasize the lot of the jatavs,
in Chowk that of the Muslims. What will the effect of all this
be on the jatav vote and the Muslim vote? The General
Elections are just a few months away. Will these votebanks
swing away from the Congress? If so, in what numbers? One
or two gentlemen have even asked if there is the danger of
further conflagration - though usually this is the least of their
concerns.’

‘And what do you tell them when they come running to you?’
asked the Rai Bahadur. His daughter-in-law - the arch-witch in
Priya’s demonology - had just brought in the tea. The top of
her head was covered with her sari. She poured the tea, gave
them a sharp look, exchanged a couple of words, and went out.

The thread of the conversation had been lost, but the Rai
Bahadur, perhaps remembering the cross-examinations for
which he had been famous in his prime, drew it gently back
again.

‘Oh, nothing,’ said L.N. Agarwal quite calmly. ‘I just tell them
whatever is necessary to stop them from keeping me awake.’

‘Nothing?’

‘No, nothing much. Just that things will blow over ; that
what’s done is done; that a little discipline never did a
neighbourhood any harm; that the General Elections are still
far enough away. That sort of thing.’ L.N. Agarwal sipped his
tea before continuing : ‘The fact of the matter is that the
country has far more important things to think about. Food is
the main one. Bihar is virtually starving. And if we have a bad
monsoon, we will be too. Mere

317Muslims threatening us from inside the country or across
the border we can deal with. If Nehru were not so softhearted
we would have dealt with them properly a few| years ago. And
now these jatavs, these’ - his expression’ conveyed distaste at
the words - ‘these scheduled caste people are becoming a
problem once again. But let’s see, let’s see. …’

Ram Vilas Goyal had sat silent through the whole exchange.
Once he frowned slightly, once he nodded.

‘That is what I like about my son-in-law,’ reflected L.N.
Agarwal. ‘He’s not dumb, but he doesn’t speak.’ He decided
yet again that he had made the right match for his daughter.
Priya could provoke, and he would simply not allow himself to
be provoked.

5.5

MEANWHILE, upstairs, Priya was talking to Veena, who had
come to pay her a visit. But it was more than a social visit, it
was an emergency. Veena was very distressed. She had come

home and found Kedarnath not merely with his eyes closed
but with his head in his hands. This was far worse than his
general state of optimistic anxiety. He had ïïot wanted to ta\k
about it, “out s’ne had eventually discovered that he was in
very grave financial trouble. With the pickets and the
stationing of the police in Chowk, the wholesale shoe market
had finally ground from a slowdown to a complete halt. Every
day now his chits were corning due, and he just did not have
the cash to pay them. Those who owed him money,
particularly two large stores in Bombay, had deferred paying
him for past supplies because they thought he could not ensure
future supplies. The supplies he got from people like Jagat
Ram, who made shoes to order, were not enough. To fulfil the
orders that buyers around the country had placed with him, he
needed the shoes of the basket-wallahs, and they did not dare
come to Misri Mandi these days.

But the immediate problem was how to pay for the chits

3*8

that were coming due. He had no one to go to; all his
associates were themselves short of cash. Going to his fatherin-law was for him out of the question. He was at his wits’
end. He would try once more to talk to his creditors - the
moneylenders who held his chits and their commission agents
who came to him for payment when they were due. He would
try to persuade them that it would do no one any good to drive
him and others like him to the wall in a credit squeeze. This
situation would surely not last long. He was not insolvent, just
illiquid. But even as he spoke he knew what their answer
would be. He knew that money, unlike labour, owed no
allegiance to a particular trade, and could flow out of shoes
and into, say, cold storage facilities without retraining or
compunction or doubt. It only asked two questions : ‘What
interest?’ and ‘What risk?’

Veena had not come to Priya for financial help, but to ask her
how best to sell the jewellery she had got from her mother
upon her marriage - and to weep on her shoulder. She had
brought the jewellery with her. Only a little had remained from
the traumatic days after the family’s flight from Lahore. Every
piece meant so much to her that she started crying when she
thought of losing it. She had only two requests - that her
husband not find out until the jewellery had actually been sold;
and that for a few weeks at least her father and mother should
not know.

They talked quickly, because there was no privacy in the
house, and at any moment anyone could walk into Priya’s
room.

‘My father’s here,’ Priya said. ‘Downstairs, talking politics.’

‘We will always be friends, no matter what,’ said Veena
suddenly, and started crying again.

Priya hugged her friend, told her to have courage, and
suggested a brisk walk on the roof.

‘What, in this heat, are you mad?’ asked Veena.

‘Why not? It’s either heat-stroke or interruption by my motherin-law - and I know which I’d prefer.’

‘I’m scared of your monkeys,’ said Veena as a second

3*9line of defence. ‘First they fight on the roof of the daal
factory, then they leap over onto your roof. Shahi Darvaza
should be renamed Hanuman Dwar.’ »

‘You’re not scared of anything. I don’t believe you,’ said
Priya. ‘In fact, I envy you. You can walk over by yourself any
time. Look at me. And look at these bars on the balcony. The
monkeys can’t come in, and I can’t go out.’

‘Ah,’ said Veena, ‘you shouldn’t envy me.’

They were silent for a while.

‘How is Bhaskar?’ asked Priya.

Veena’s plump face lit up in a smile, rather a sad one. ‘He’s
very well - as well as your pair, anyway. He insisted on
coming along. At the moment they are all playing cricket in
the square downstairs. The pipal tree doesn’t

seem to bother them I wish for your sake, Priya, that

you had a brother or sister,’ Veena added suddenly, thinking of
her own childhood.

The two friends went to the balcony and looked down through
the wrought-iron grille. Their three children, together with two
others, were playing cricket in the small square. Priya’s tenyear-old daughter was by far the best of them. She was a fair
bowler and a fine batsman. She usually managed to avoid the
pipal tree, which gave the otheis endless trouble.

‘Why don’t you stay for lunch?’ asked Priya.

‘I can’t,’ said Veena, thinking of Kedarnath and her mother-inlaw, who would be expecting her. ‘Tomorrow perhaps.’

‘Tomorrow then.’

Veena left the bag of jewellery with Priya, who locked it up in
a steel almirah. As she stood by the cupboard Veena said :
‘You’re putting on weight.’

‘I’ve always been fat,’ said Priya, ‘and because I do nothing
but sit here all day like a caged bird, I’ve grown fatter.’

‘You’re not fat and you never have been,’ said her friend. ‘And
since when have you stopped pacing on the roof?’

330’I haven’t,’ said Priya, ‘but one day I’m going to throw
myself off it.’

‘Now if you talk like that I’m going to leave at once,’ said
Veena and made to go.

‘No, don’t go. Seeing you has cheered me up,’ said Priya. ‘I
hope you have lots of bad fortune. Then you’ll come running
to me all the time. If it hadn’t been for Partition you’d never
have come back to Brahmpur.’

Veena laughed.

‘Come on, let’s go to the roof,’ continued Priya. ‘I really can’t
talk freely to you here. People are always coming in and
listening from the balcony. I hate it here, I’m so unhappy, if I
don’t tell you I’ll burst.’ She laughed, and pulled Veena to her
feet. ‘I’ll tell Bablu to get us something cold to prevent heatstroke.’

Bablu was the weird fifty-year-old servant who had come to
the family as a child and had grown more eccentric with each
passing year. Lately he had taken to eating everyone’s
medicines.

When they got to the roof, they sat in the shade of the watertank and started laughing like schoolgirls.

‘We should live next to each other,’ said Priya, shaking out her
jet black hair, which she had washed and oiled that morning.
‘Then, even if I throw myself off my roof, I’ll fall onto yours.’

‘It would be awful if we lived next to each other,’ said Veena,
laughing. ‘The witch and the scarecrow would get together
every afternoon and complain about their daughters-in-law.
“O, she’s bewitched my son, they play chaupar on the roof all
the time, she’ll make him as dark as soot. And she sings on the
roof so shamelessly to the whole neighbourhood. And she
deliberately prepares rich food so that I fill up with gas. One
day I’ll explode and she’ll dance over my bones.” ‘

Priya giggled. ‘No,’ she said, ‘it’ll be fine. The two kitchens
will face each other, and the vegetables can join us in
complaining about our oppression. “O, friend Potato, the

khatri scarecrow is boiling me. Tell everyone I died miserably.
Farewell, farewell, never forget me.”

“O friend

331Pumpkin, the bania witch has spared me for only another
two days. I’ll weep for you but I won’t be able to attend your
chautha. Forgive me, forgive me.” ‘ ,

Veena’s laughter bubbled out again. ‘Actually, I feel quite
sorry for my scarecrow,’ she said. ‘She had a hard time during
Partition. But she was quite horrible to me even in Lahore,
even after Bhaskar was born. When she sees I’m not miserable
she becomes even more miserable. When we become mothersin-law, Priya, we’ll feed our daughters-in-law ghee and sugar
every day.’

‘I certainly don’t feel sorry for my witch,’ said Priya
disgustedly. ‘And I shall certainly bully my daughter-inlaw
from morning till night until I’ve completely crushed her
spirit. Women look much more beautiful when they’re
unhappy, don’t you think?’ She shook her thick black hair
from side to side and glared at the stairs. ‘This is a vile house,’
she added. ‘I’d much rather be a monkey and fight on the roof
of the daal factory than a daughter-in-law in the Rai Bahadur’s
house. I’d run to the market and steal bananas. I’d fight the
dogs, I’d snap at the bats. I’d go to Tarbuz ka Bazaar and
pinch the bottoms of all the pretty prostitutes. I’d … do you
know what the monkeys did here the other day?’

‘No,’ said Veena. ‘Tell me.’

‘I was just going to. Bablu, who is getting crazier by the
minute, placed the Rai Bahadur’s alarm clocks on the ledge.
Well, the next thing we saw was three monkeys in the pipal
tree, examining them, saying, “Mmmmmmm”,
“Mmmmmmmm”, in a high-pitched voice, as if to say, “Well?
We have your clocks. What now?” The witch went out. We
didn’t have the little packets of wheat which we usually bribe
them with, so she took some musammis and bananas and
carrots and tried to tempt them down, saying, “Here, here,
come, beautiful ones, come, come, I swear by

Hanuman I’ll give you lovely things to eat “ And they

came down all right, one by one they came down, very
cautiously, each with a clock tucked beneath his arm. Then
they began to eat the food, first with one hand, like this - then,
putting the clocks down, with both hands.

332-Well - no sooner were all three clocks on the ground than
the witch took a stick which she had hidden behind her back
and threatened their lives with it - using such filthy language
that I was forced to admire her. The carrot and the stick, don’t
they say in English? So the story has a happy ending. But the
monkeys of Shahi Darvaza are very smart. They know what
they can hold up to ransom, and what they can’t.’

Bablu had come up the stairs, gripping with four dirty fingers
of one hand four glasses of cold nimbu pani filled almost to
the brim. ‘Here!’ he said, setting them down. ‘Drink! If you sit
in the sun like this, you’ll catch pneumonia.’ Then he
disappeared.

‘The same as ever?’ asked Veena.

‘The same, but even more so,’ said Priya. ‘Nothing changes.
The only comforting constant here is that Vakil Sahib snores
as loudly as ever. Sometimes at night when the bed vibrates, I
think he’ll disappear, and all that will be left for me to weep
over will be his snore. But I can’t tell you some of the things
that go on in this house,’ she added darkly. ‘You’re lucky you
don’t have much money. What people will do for money,
Veena, I can’t tell you. And what does it go into? Not into
education or art or music or literature - no, it all goes into
jewellery. And the women of the house have to wear ten tons
of it on their necks at every wedding. And you should see
them all sizing each other up. Oh, Veena -‘ she said, suddenly
realizing her insensitivity, ‘I have a habit of blabbering. Tell
me to be quiet.’

‘No, no, I’m enjoying it,’ said Veena. ‘But tell me, when the
jeweller comes to your house next time will you be able to get
an estimate? For the small pieces - and, well, especially for my
navratan? Will you be able to get a few minutes with him
alone so that your mother-in-law doesn’t come to know? If I
had to go to a jeweller myself I’d certainly be cheated. But you
know all about these things.’

Priya nodded. ‘I’ll try,’ she said. The navratan was a lovely
piece; she had last seen it round Veena’s neck at Pran and
Savita’s wedding. It consisted of an arc of nine

333square gold compartments, each the setting of a different
precious stone, with delicate enamel work at the sides and
even on the back, where it could not be seen. Topaz, white ‘
sapphire, emerald, blue sapphire, ruby, diamond, pearl, catseye
and coral: instead of looking cluttered and disordered, the
heavy necklace had a wonderful combination of traditional
solidity and charm. For Veena it had more than that: of all her
mother’s gifts it was the one she loved most.

‘I think our fathers are mad to dislike each other so much,’
said Priya out of the blue. ‘Who cares who the next Chief
Minister of Purva Pradesh will be?’

Veena nodded as she sipped Jier nimbu pani.

‘What news of Maan?’ asked Priya.

They gossiped on : Maan and Saeeda Bai ; the Nawab Sahib’s
daughter and whether her situation in purdah was worse than
Priya’s ; Savita’s pregnancy ; even, at secondhand, Mrs Rupa
Mehra, and how she was trying to corrupt her samdhins by
teaching them rummy.

They had forgotten about the world. But suddenly Bablu’s
large head and rounded shoulders appeared at the top of the
stairs. ‘Oh my God,’ said Priya with a start. ‘My duties in the
kitchen - since I’ve been talking to you, they’ve gone straight
out of my head. My mother-in-law must have finished her
stupid rigmarole of cooking her own food in a wet dhoti after
her bath, and she’s yelling for me. I’ve got to run. She does it
for purity, so she says though she doesn’t mind that we have
cockroaches the size of buffaloes running around all over the
house, and rats that bite off your hair at night if you don’t
wash the oil off. Oh, do stay for lunch, Veena, I never get to
see you!’

‘I really can’t,’ said Veena. ‘The Sleeper likes his food just so.
And so does the Snorer, I’m sure.’

‘Oh, he’s not so particular,’ said Priya, frowning. ‘He puts up
with all my nonsense. But I can’t go out, I can’t go out, I can’t

go out anywhere except for weddings and the odd trip to the
temple or a religious fair and you know what I think of those.
If he wasn’t so good, I would go completely mad. Wifebeating is something of a common

334sport in our neighbourhood, you aren’t considered much of
a man if you don’t slap your wife around a couple of times,
but Ram Vilas wouldn’t even beat a drum at Dussehra. And
he’s so respectful to the witch it makes me sick, though she’s
only his stepmother. They say he’s so nice to witnesses that
they tell him the truth - even though they’re in court! Well, if
you can’t stay, you must come tomorrow. Promise me again.’

Veena promised, and the two friends went down to the room
on the top floor. Priya’s daughter and son were sitting on the
bed, and they informed Veena that Bhaskar had gone back
home.

‘What? By himself?’ said Veena anxiously.

‘He’s nine years old, and it’s five minutes away,’ said the boy.

‘Shh!’ said Priya. ‘Speak properly to your elders.’

‘I’d better go at once,’ said Veena.

On the way down, Veena met L.N. Agarwal coming up. The
stairs were narrow and steep. She pressed herself against the
wall and said namasté. He acknowledged the greeting with a
‘Jeeti raho, bed’, and went up.

But though he had addressed her as ‘daughter’, Veena felt that
he had been reminded the instant he saw her of the ministerial
rival whose daughter she really was.

5.6

‘is the Government aware that the Brahmpur Police made a
lathi charge on the members of the jatav community last week
when they demonstrated in front of the Govind Shoe Mart?’

The Minister for Home Affairs, Shri L.N. Agarwal, got to his
feet.

‘There was no lathi charge,’ he replied.

‘Mild lathi charge, if you like. Is the Government aware of the
incident I am referring to?’

The Home Minister looked across the well of the great circular
chamber, and stated calmly :

335’There was no lathi charge in the usual sense. The police
were forced to use light canes, one inch thick, when the unruly
crowd had stoned and manhandled several members of the
public and one policeman, and when it was apparent that the
safety of the Govind Shoe Mart, and of the public, and of the
policemen themselves was seriously threatened.’

He stared at his interrogator, Ram Dhan, a short, dark,
pockmarked man in his forties, who asked his questions in

standard Hindi but with a strong Brahmpuri accent with his
arms folded across his chest.

‘Is it a fact,’ continued the questioner, ‘that on the same
evening, the police beat up a large number of jatavs who were
peacefully attempting to picket the Brahmpur Shoe Mart
nearby?’ Shri Ram Dhan was an Independent MLA from the
scheduled castes, and he stressed the word ‘jatavs’. A kind of
indignant murmur rose from all around the House. The
Speaker called for order, and the Home Minister stood up
again.

‘It is not a fact,’ he stated, keeping his voice level. ‘The police,
being hard pressed by an angry mob, defended themselves
and, in the course of this action, three people were injured. As
for the honourable member’s innuendo that the police singled
out members of a particular caste from the mob or were
especially severe because the mob consisted ‘largely or
members of that caste, “1 would advise him to be more just to
the police. Let me assure him that the action would have been
no different had the mob been constituted differently.’

Limpet-like, however, Shri Ram Dhan continued: ‘Is it a fact
that the honourable Home Minister was in constant touch with
the local authorities of Brahmpur, in particular the District
Magistrate and the Superintendent of Police?’

‘Yes.’ L.N. Agârwal looked upwards, having delivered himself
of this single syllable and as if seeking patience, towards the
great dome of white frosted glass through which the late
morning light poured down on the Legislative Assembly.

‘Was the specific sanction of the Home Minister taken

336by the district authorities before making the lathi charge on
the unarmed mob? If so, when? If not, why not?’

The Home Minister sighed with exasperation rather than
weariness as he stood up again : ‘May I reiterate that I do not
accept the use of the words “lathi charge” in this context. Nor
was the mob unarmed, since they used stones. However, I am
glad that the honourable member admits that it was a mob that
the police were facing. Indeed, from the fact that he uses the
word in a printed, starred question, it is clear that he knew this
before today.’

‘Would the honourable Minister kindly answer the question
put to him?’ said Ram Dhan heatedly, opening his arms and
clenching his fists.

‘I should have thought the answer was obvious,’ said L.N.
Agarwal. He paused, then continued, as if reciting: ‘The
developing situation on the ground is sometimes such that it is
often tactically impossible to foresee what will happen, and a
certain flexibility must be left to the local authorities.’

But Ram Dhan clung on. ‘If, as the honourable Minister
admits, no such specific sanction was taken, was the
honourable Home Minister informed of the proposed action of
the police? Did he or the Chief Minister give their tacit
approval?’

Once again the Home Minister rose. He gJanced at a point in
the dead centre of the dark green carpet that covered the well.
‘The action was not premeditated. It had to be taken forthwith
in order to meet a grave situation which had suddenly

developed. It did not admit of any previous reference to
Government.’

A member shouted: ‘And what about the Chief Minister?’

The Speaker of the House, a learned but not normally very
assertive man who was dressed in a kurta and dhoti, looked
down from his high platform below the seal of Purva Pradesh a great pipal tree - and said: ‘These short-order starred
questions are addressed specifically to the honourable Home
Minister, and his answers must be taken to be sufficient.’

337Several voices now rose. One, dominating the others,
boomed out: ‘Since the honourable Chief Minister is present in
the House after his travels in other parts, perhaps he would
care to oblige us with an answer even though he is not
compelled by the Standing Orders to do so? I believe the
House would appreciate it.’

The Chief Minister, Shri S.S. Sharma, stood up without his
stick, leaned with his left hand on his dark wooden desk and
looked to his left and right. He was positioned along the curve
of the central well, almost exactly between L.N. Agarwal and
Mahesh Kapoor. He addressed the Speaker in his nasal, rather
paternal, voice, nodding his head gently as he did so : ‘I have
no objection to speaking, Mr Speaker, but I have nothing to
add. The action taken call it by what name the honourable
members will - was taken under the aegis of the responsible
Cabinet Minister.’ There was a pause, during which it was not
clear what the Chief Minister was going to add, if anything.
‘Whom I naturally support,’ he said.

He had not even sat down when the inexorable Ram Dhan
came back into the fray. ‘I am much obliged to the honourable

Chief Minister,’ he said, ‘but I would like to seek a
clarification. By saying that he supports the Home Minister,
does the Chief Minister mean to imply that he approves of the
policy of the district authorities?’

Before the Chief Minister could reply, the Home Minister
quickly rose again to say: ‘I hope that we have made ourselves
clear on this point. It was not a case of prior approval. An
inquiry was held immediately after the incident. The District
Magistrate went into the matter fully and found that the very
minimum force which was absolutely unavoidable was used.
The Government regret that such an occasion should have
arisen, but are satisfied that the finding of the District
Magistrate is correct. It was accepted by practically all
concerned that the authorities faced a serious situation with
tact and due restraint.’

A member of the Socialist Party stood up. ‘Is it true,’ he asked,
‘that it was on the prodding of members of the bania trading
community to which he belongs that the

338’•V,

honourable Home Minister’ - angry murmurs rose from the
Government benches - ‘let me finish - that the Minister
subsequently posted troops - I mean police - throughout the
length and breadth of Misri Mandi?’

‘I disallow that question,’ said the Speaker.

‘Well,’ continued the member, ‘would the honourable Minister
kindly inform us on whose advice he decided on the placing of
this threatening body of police?’

The Home Minister grasped the curve of hair under his cap
and said : ‘Government made its own decision, bearing the
totality of the situation in mind. And in the event it has proved
to be effective. There is peace at last in Misri Mandi.’

A babble of indignant shouts, earnest chatter and ostentatious
laughter arose on all sides. There were shouts of ‘What
peace?’ ‘Shame!’ ‘Who is the DM to judge the matter?’ ‘What
about the mosque?’ and so on.

‘Order! Order!’ cried the Speaker, looking flustered as another
member rose to his feet and said :

‘Will the Government consider the advisability of creating
machineries other than the interested district authorities for
making inquiries in such cases?’

‘I do not allow this question,’ said the Speaker, shaking his
head like a sparrow. ‘Under Standing Orders questions making
suggestions for action are not permissible and I am not
prepared to allow them during Question Time.’

It was the end of the Home Minister’s grilling on the Misri
Mandi incident. Though there had been only five questions on
the printed sheet, the supplementary questions had given the
exchange the character almost of a crossexamination. The
intervention of the Chief Minister had been more disturbing
than reassuring to L.N. Agarwal. Was S.S. Sharma, in his wily,
indirect way, trying to palm off full responsibility for the
action onto his second-incommand? L.N. Agarwal sat down,
sweating slightly, but he knew that he would have to be on his
feet immediately again. And, though he prided himself on

maintaining his calm in difficult circumstances, he did not
relish what he would now have to face.

3395.7

BEGUM ABIDA KHAN slowly stood up. She was dressed in
a dark blue, almost black, sari, and her pale and furious face
riveted the house even before she began to speak. She was the
wife of the Nawab of Baitar’s younger brother, and one of the
leaders of the Democratic Party, the party that sought to
protect the interests of the landowners in the face of the
impending passage of the Zamindari Abolition Bill. Although
a Shia, she had the reputation of being an aggressive protector
of the rights of all Muslims in the new, truncated Independent
India. Her husband, like his father, had been a member of the
Muslim League before Independence and had left for Pakistan
shortly afterwards. Despite the powerful persuasion and
reproach of many relatives, she, however, had chosen not to
go. Til be useless there, sitting and gossiping. Here in
Brahmpur at least I know where I am and what I can do,’ she
had said. And this morning she knew exactly what she wanted
to do. Looking straight at the man whom she considered to be
one of the less savoury manifestations of humankind, she
began her questioning from her list of starred questions.

‘Is the honourable Minister for Home Affairs aware that

at’least^nve people were’kilieb1 oy the ponce in’tne’rmng

near Chowk last Friday?’

The Home Minister, who at the best of times could not

stand the Begum, replied : ‘Indeed, I was not.’

It was somewhat obstructive of him not to elaborate,

but he did not feel like being forthcoming before this pale

harridan.

Begum Abida Khan veered from her script. ‘Will the

honourable Minister inform us exactly what he is aware

of?’ she inquired acidly.

‘I disallow that question,’ murmured the Speaker. ‘What
would the honourable Minister say was the death

toll in the firing in Chowk?’ demanded Begum Abida

Khan.

‘One,’ said L.N. Agarwal.

340Begum Abida Khan’s voice was incredulous : ‘One?’ she
cried. ‘One?’

‘One,’ replied the Home Minister, holding up the index finger
of his right hand, as if to an idiot child who had difficulty with
numbers or hearing or both.

Begum Abida Khan cried out angrily : ‘If I may inform the
honourable Minister, it was at least five, and I have good proof
of this fact. Here are copies of the death certificates of four of
the deceased. Indeed, it is likely that two more men will
shortly -‘

‘I rise on a point of order, Sir,’ said L.N. Agarwal, ignoring
her and addressing the Speaker directly. ‘I understand that
Question Time is used for getting information from and not for
giving information to Ministers.’

Begum Abida Khan’s voice continued regardless : ‘- two more
men will shortly be receiving such certificates of honour
thanks to the henchmen of the honourable Minister. I would
like to table these death certificates - these copies of death
certificates.’

‘I am afraid that that is not possible under the Standing
Orders….’ protested the Speaker.

Begum Abida Khan waved the documents around, and raised
her voice higher: ‘The newspapers have copies of them, why is
the House not entitled to see them? When the blood of
innocent men, of mere boys, is being callously shed -‘

‘The honourable member will not use Question Time to make
speeches,’ said the Speaker, and banged his gavel.

Begum Abida Khan suddenly pulled herself together, and once
again addressed L.N. Agarwal.

‘Will the honourable Minister kindly inform the House on
what basis he came to the total figure of one?’

‘The report was furnished by the District Magistrate, who was
present at the time of the event.’

‘By “present” you mean that he ordered the mowing down of
these unfortunate people, is that not so?’

L.N. Agarwal paused before answering:

‘The District Magistrate is a seasoned officer, who took
whatever steps he considered the situation required. As the

341honourable member is aware, an inquiry under a more
senior officer will shortly be made, as it is in all cases of an
order to fire; and I suggest to her that we wait until such time
as the report is published before we give vent to speculation.’

‘Speculation?’ burst out Begum Abida Khan. ‘Speculation?
Do you call this speculation? You should be - the honourable
Minister’ - she emphasized the word maananiya or honourable
- ‘the honourable Minister should be ashamed of himself. I
have seen the corpses of two men with these very eyes. I am
not speculating. If it were the blood of his own co-religionists
that was flowing in the streets, the honourable Minister would
not “wait until such time”. We know of the overt and tacit

support he gives that foul organization the Linga Rakshak
Samiti, set up expressly to destroy the sanctity of our mosque
-‘

The House was getting increasingly excited under her oratory,
inappropriate though it may have been. L.N. Agarwal was
grasping his curve of grey hair with his right hand, tense as a
claw, and - having cast his calm demeanour to the winds - was
glaring at her at every scornful ‘honourable’. The frail-looking
Speaker made another attempt to stem the flow :

‘The honourable member may perhaps need reminding that
according to my Question List, she has three starred questions
remaining.’

‘I thank you, Sir,’ said Begum Abida Khan. ‘I shall come to
them. In fact I shall ask the next one immediately. It is very
germane to the subject. Will the honourable Minister of Home
Affairs inform us whether prior to the firings in Chowk a
warning to disperse was read out under Section 144 of the
Criminal Procedure Code? If so, when? If not, why not?’

Brutally and angrily L.N. Agarwal replied:

‘It was not. It could not have been. There was no time to do so.
If people start riots for religious reasons and attempt to destroy
temples they must accept the consequences. Or mosques, of
course, for that matter -‘

But now Begum Abida Khan was almost shouting. ‘Riot?

342.Riot? How does the honourable Minister come to the
conclusion that that was the intention of the crowd? It was the
time of evening prayer. They were proceeding to the mosque -‘

‘From all reports, it was obvious. They were rushing forward
violently, shouting with their accustomed zealotry, and
brandishing weapons,’ said the Home Minister.

There was uproar.

A member of the Socialist Party cried : ‘Was the honourable
Minister present?’

A member of the Congress Party said: ‘He can’t be
everywhere.’

‘But this was brutal,’ shouted someone else. ‘They fired at
point-blank range.’

‘Honourable members are reminded that the Minister is to
answer his own questions,’ cried the Speaker.

‘I thank you, Sir -‘ began the Home Minister. But to his utter
amazement and, indeed, horror, a Muslim member of the
Congress Party, Abdus Salaam, who happened also to be
Parliamentary Secretary to the Revenue Minister, now rose to
ask: ‘How could such a grave step - an order to fire - have
been taken without either giving due warning to disperse or
attempting to ascertain the intention of the crowd?’

That Abdus Salaam should have risen to his feet shocked the
House. In a sense it was not clear where he was addressing the
question - he was looking at an indeterminate point
somewhere to the right of the great seal of Purva Pradesh
above the Speaker’s chair. He seemed, in fact, to be thinking
aloud. He was a scholarly young man, known particularly for
his excellent understanding of land tenure law, and was one of
the chief architects of the Purva Pradesh Zamindari Abolition
Bill. That he should make common cause with a leader of the
Democratic Party - the party of the zamindars - on this issue,
stunned members of all parties. Mahesh Kapoor himself was
surprised at this intervention by his Parliamentary Secretary
and turned around with a frown, not entirely pleased. The
Chief Minister scowled. L.N. Agarwal was gripped with

343outrage and humiliation. Several members of the House
were on their feet, waving their order papers, and no one, not
even the Speaker, could be clearly heard. It was becoming a
free-for-all.

When, after repeated thumps of the Speaker’s gavel, a
semblance of order was restored, the Home Minister, though
still in shock, rose to ask :

‘May I know, Sir, whether a Parliamentary Secretary to a
Minister is authorized to put questions to Government?’

Abdus Salaam, looking around in bewilderment, amazed by
the furore he had unwittingly caused, said: ‘I withdraw.’

But now there were cries of: ‘No, no!’ ‘How can you do that?’
and ‘If you won’t ask it, I will’.

The Speaker sighed.

‘As far as procedure is concerned, every member is at liberty
to put questions,’ he ruled.

‘Why then?’ asked a member angrily. ‘Why was it done? Will
the honourable Minister answer or not?’

‘I did not catch the question,’ said L.N. Agarwal. ‘I believe it
has been withdrawn.’

‘I am asking, like the other member, why no one found 1 out
what the crowd wanted? How did the DM know it 1 was
violent?’ repeated the member. j

‘There should be an adjournment motion on this,’ cried I
another.

‘The Speaker already has such a notice with him,’ said a third.
»

Over all this rose the piercing voice of Begum Abida I Khan :
‘It was as brutal as the violence of Partition. A J •youth was
k\\ea -who was not even patt ot tVve demonstra-J tion. Would
the honourable Minister for Home Affairs! care to explain how
this happened?’ She sat down anfflj glared. I

‘Démonstration?’ said L.N. Agarwal with an air of foren- I sic
triumph. \

‘Crowd, rather -‘ said the battling Begum, leaping up | again
and slipping out of his coils. ‘You are not going to deny,
surely, that it was the time of prayer? The demonstra-

344I

tion - the demonstration of gross inhumanity, for that is what it
was - was on the part of the police. Now will the honourable
Minister not take refuge in semantics and deal with the facts.’

When he saw the wretched woman get up again, the Home
Minister felt a stab of hatred in his heart. She was a thorn in
his flesh and had insulted and humiliated him before the
House and he now decided that, come what may, he was going
to get back at her and her house - the family of the Nawab
Sahib of Baitar. They were all fanatics, these Muslims, who
appeared not to realize they were here in this country on
sufferance. A calm dose of wellapplied law would do them
good.

‘I can only answer one question at a time,’ L.N. Agarwal said
in a dangerous growl.

‘The supplementary questions of the honourable member who
asked the starred questions will take precedence,’ said the
Speaker.

Begum Abida Khan smiled grimly.

The Home Minister said: ‘We must wait till the report is
published. Government is not aware that an innocent youth
was fired upon, let alone injured or killed.’

Now Abdus Salaam stood up again. From around the House
outraged cries rose: ‘Sit down, sit down.’ ‘Shame!’ ‘Why are
you attacking your own side?’

‘Why should he sit down?’ ‘What have you got to hide?’ ‘You
are a Congress member - you should know better’.

But so unprecedented was the situation that even those who
opposed his intervention were curious.

When the cries had died down to a sort of volatile muttering,
Abdus Salaam, still looking rather puzzled, asked: ‘What I
have been wondering about during the course of this
discussion is, well, why was a deterrent police force - well,
maybe just an adequate police force - not maintained at the site
of the temple? Then there would have been no need to fire in
this panicky manner.’

The Home Minister drew in his breath. Everyone is looking at
me, he thought. I must control my expression.

345’Is this supplementary question addressed to the
honourable Minister?’ asked the Speaker.

‘Yes, it is, Sir,’ said Abdus Salaam, suddenly determined. ‘I
will not withdraw this question. Would the honourable
Minister inform us why there was not a sufficient and
deterrent police force maintained either at the kotwali or at the
site of the temple itself? Why were there only a dozen men left
to maintain law and order in this grievously disturbed area,
especially after the contents of the Friday sermon at the
Alamgiri Mosque became known to the authorities?’

This was the question that L.N. Agarwal had been dreading,
and he was appalled and enraged that it had been asked by an
MLA from his own party, and a Parliamentary Secretary at
that. He felt defenceless. Was this a plot by Mahesh Kapoor to
undermine him? He looked at the Chief Minister, who was
waiting for his response with an unreadable expression. L.N.
Agarwal suddenly realized that he had been on his feet for a
long time, and wanted very badly to urinate. And he wanted to
get out of here as quickly as possible. He began to take refuge
in the kind of stonewalling that the Chief Minister himself
often used, but to much shabbier effect than that master of
parliamentary evasion. By now, however, he hardly cared. He
was convinced that this was indeed a plot by Muslims and
socalled secular Hindus to attack him - and that his own party
had been infected with treason.

Looking with calm hatred first at Abdus Salaam, then at
Begum Abida Khan, he said : ‘I can merely reiterate - wait for
the report.’

A member asked : ‘Why were so many police diverted to
Misri Mandi for a totally unnecessary show of force when they
were really needed in Chowk?’

‘Wait for the report,’ said the Home Minister, glaring around
the House, as if challenging the members to goad him further.

Begum Abida Khan stood up. ‘Has the Government taken any
action against the District Magistrate responsible for this
unprovoked firing?’ she demanded.

346’The question does not arise.’

‘If the much-anticipated report shows that the firing was
uncalled for and irregular, does Government plan to take any
steps in this regard?’

‘That will be seen in due course. I should think it might.’

‘What steps does Government intend to take?’

‘Proper and adequate steps.’

‘Has Government taken any such steps in similar situations in
the past?’

‘It has.’

‘What are those steps that have been taken?’

‘Such steps as were considered reasonable and proper.’

Begum Abida Khan looked at him as she would at a snake,
wounded but still evading the final blow by twisting its head
from side to side. Well, she was not done with him yet.

‘Will the honourable Minister name the wards or
neighbourhoods in which restrictions have now been placed
with regard to the possession of cold steel? Have these
restrictions been placed as the result of the recent firing? If so,
why were they not placed earlier?’

The Home Minister looked at the pipal tree in the great seal,
and said :

‘Government presumes that the honourable member means by
the phrase “cold steel” objects such as swords, daggers, axes,
and similar weapons.’

‘Household knives have also been wrested by the police from
housewives,’ said Begum Abida Khan in more of a jeer than a
statement. ‘Well, what are the neighbourhoods ?’

‘Chowk, Hazrat Mahal, and Captainganj,’ said L.N. Agarwal.

‘Not Misri Mandi?’

‘No.’

‘Although that was the site of the heaviest police presence?’
persisted Begum Abida Khan.

‘Police had to be shifted in large numbers to the real trouble
spots-‘ began L.N. Agarwal.

347He stopped abruptly, realizing too late how he had exposed
himself by what he had started to say.

‘So the honourable Minister admits -‘ began Begum Abida
Khan, her eyes gleaming triumphantly.

‘The Government admits nothing. The report will detail
everything,’ said the Home Minister, appalled by the
confession she had elicited from him.

Begum Abida Khan smiled contemptuously, and decided that
the reactionary, trigger-happy, anti-Muslim bully had just
condemned himself out of his own mouth sufficiently for
much further skewering to be productive. She let her questions
taper away.

‘Why were these restrictions on cold steel imposed?’

‘In order to prevent crimes and incidents of violence.’

‘Incidents?’

‘Such as riots by inflamed mobs,’ he cried out in weary rage.

‘How long will these restrictions continue?’ asked Begum
Abida Khan, almost laughing.

‘Till they are withdrawn.’

‘And when does the Government propose to withdraw these
restrictions?’

‘As soon as the situation permits.’

Begum Abida Khan gently sat down.

There followed a notice for adjournment of the House in order
to discuss the issue of the firing, but the Speaker disposed of
this quickly enough. Adjournment motions were only granted
in the most exceptional cases of crisis or emergency, where
discussion could brook no delay; to grant them or not was in
the Speaker’s absolute discretion. The subject of the police
firing, even had it been such a subject - which, to his mind, it
was not - had been sufficiently aired already. The questions of
that remarkable, almost unreinable woman had virtually
become a debate.

The Speaker went on to the next items on the day’s business :
first, the announcement of bills passed by the state legislature
that had received the assent of the Governor of the state or the
President of India; next, the most

348important matter on the agenda for the entire session : the
continuing debate on the Zamindari Abolition Bill.

But L.N. Agarwal did not stay to listen to discussions on the
bill. As soon as the notice for an adjournment motion had been
rejected by the Speaker, he fled - not directly across the well to
the exit but along an aisle to the perimeter gallery, and then
along the dark, wood-panelled wall. His tension and animus
were palpable in the way he walked. He was unconsciously
crushing his order papers in his hand. Several members tried to
talk to him, to sympathize with him. He brushed them off. He
walked unseeingly to the exit, and made straight for the
bathroom.

5.8

L.N. AGARWAL undid the draw-string of his pyjamas and
stood at the urinal. But he was so angry that he was unable to
urinate for a while.

He stared at the long, white-tiled wall and saw in it an image
of the packed chamber, the taunting face of Begum Abida
Khan, the furrowed academic expression of Abdus Salaam,
Mahesh Kapoor’s uninterpretable frown, the patient but
condescending look on the face of the Chief Minister as he had
fumbled pathetically through the poisonous swamp of
Question Time.

There was no one in the lavatory except a couple of sweepers,
and they were talking to each other. A few words of their
conversation broke in upon L.N. Agarwal’s fury. They were
complaining about the difficulties of obtaining grain even at
the government ration shops. They talked casually, not paying
any attention to the powerful Home Minister and very little
attention to their own work. As they continued to talk, a
feeling of unreality descended upon L.N. Agarwal. He was
taken out of his own world, his own passions, ambitions,
hatreds and ideals into a realization of the continuing and
urgent lives of people other than himself. He even felt a little
ashamed of himself.

349The sweepers were now discussing a movie that one of
them had seen. It happened to be Deedar.

‘But it was Daleep Kumar’s role - oh - it brought tears to my
eyes - he always has that quiet smile on his lips even when
singing the saddest songs - such a good-natured man - blind
himself, and yet giving pleasure to the whole world -‘

He began humming one of the hit songs from the movie - ‘Do
not forget the days of childhood ‘

The second man, who had not seen the movie yet, joined in the
song - which, ever since the film had been released, was on
almost everyone’s lips.

He now said : ‘Nargis looked so beautiful on the poster I
thought I would see the movie last night, but my wife takes my
money from me as soon as I get my pay.’

The first man laughed. ‘If she let you keep the money, all she
would see of it would be empty envelopes and empty bottles.’

The second man continued wistfully, trying to conjure up the
divine images of his heroine. ‘So, tell me, what was she like?
How did she act? What a contrast - that cheap dancing girl
Nimmi or Pimmi or whatever her name is and Nargis - so
high-class, so delicate.’

The first man grunted. ‘Give me Nimmi any day, I’d rather
live with her than with Nargis - Nargis is too thin, too full of
herself. Anyway, what’s the difference in class between them?
She was also one of those.’

The second man looked shocked. ‘Nargis?’

‘Yes, yes, your Nargis. How do you think she got her first
chance in the movies?’ And he laughed and began to hum to
himself again. The other man was silent and began to scrub the
floor once more.

L.N. Agarwal’s thoughts, as he listened to the sweepers
talking, turned from Nargis to another ‘one of those’ Saeeda
Bai - and to the now commonplace gossip about her
relationship with Mahesh Kapoor’s son. Good! he thought.
Mahesh Kapoor may starch his delicately embroidered kurtas
into rigidity, but his son lies at the feet of prostitutes.

350Though less possessed by rage, he had once again entered
his own familiar world of politics and rivalry. He walked along
the curved corridor that led to his room. He knew, however,
that as soon as he entered his office, he would be set upon by
his anxious supporters. What little calm he had achieved in the
last few minutes would be destroyed.

‘No - I’ll go to the library instead,’ he muttered to himself.

Upstairs, in the cool, quiet precincts of the library of the
Legislative Assembly, he sat down, took off his cap, and rested
his chin on his hands. A couple of other MLAs were sitting
and reading at the long wooden tables. They looked up,
greeted him, and continued with their work. L.N. Agarwal
closed his eyes and tried to make his mind blank. He needed to
establish his equanimity again before he faced the legislators
below. But the image that came before him was not the blank
nothingness he sought, but the spurious blankness of the urinal
wall. His thoughts turned to the virulent Begum Abida Khan
once more, and once more he had to fight down his rage and
humiliation. How little there was in common between this
shameless, exhibitionistic woman who smoked in private and
screeched in public, who had not even followed her husband
when he had left for Pakistan but had immodestly and
spouselessly remained in Purva Pradesh to make trouble - and
his own late wife, Priya’s mother, who had sweetened his life
through her years of selfless care and love.

I wonder if some part of Baitar House could be construed as
evacuee property now that that woman’s husband is living in
Pakistan, thought L.N. Agarwal. A word to the Custodian, an
order to the police, and let’s see what I am able to do.

After ten minutes of thought, he got up, nodded at the two
MLAs, and went downstairs to his room.

A few MLAs were already sitting in his room when he arrived,
and several more gathered in the next few minutes as they
came to know that he was holding court. Imperturbable, even
smiling slightly to himself, L.N. Agarwal now held forth as he
was accustomed to doing. He calmed

35idown his agitated followers, he placed matters in
perspective, he mapped out strategy. To one of the MLAs, who
had commiserated with his leader because the twin
misfortunes of Misri Mandi and Chowk had fallen
simultaneously upon him, L.N. Agarwal replied:

‘You are a case in point that a good man will not make a good
politician. Just think - if you had to do a number of outrageous
things, would you want the public to forget them or remember
them?’

Clearly the answer was intended to be ‘Forget them,’ and this
was the MLA’s response.

‘As quickly as possible?’ asked L.N. Agarwal.

‘As quickly as possible, Minister Sahib.’

‘Then the answer,’ said L.N. Agarwal, ‘if you have a number
of outrageous things to do is to do them simultaneously.
People will scatter their complaints, not concentrate them.
When the dust settles, at least two or three out of five battles
will be yours. And the public has a short memory. As for the
firing in Chowk, and those dead rioters, it will all be stale
news in a week.’

The MLA looked doubtful, but nodded in agreement.

‘A lesson here and there,’ went on L.N. Agarwal, ‘never did
anyone any harm. Either you rule, or you don’t. The British
knew that they had to make an example sometimes - that’s
why they blew the mutineers from cannons in 1857. Anyway,
people are always dying - and I would prefer death by a bullet
to death by starvation.’

Needless to say, this was not a choice that faced him. But he
was in a philosophical mood.

‘Our problems are very simple, you know. In fact, they all boil
down to two things : lack of food and lack of morality. And
the policies of our rulers in Delhi - what shall I say? - don’t
help either much.’

‘Now that Sardar Patel is dead, no one can control Panditji,’
remarked one young but very conservative MLA.

‘Even before Patel died who would Nehru listen to?’ said L.N.
Agarwal dismissively. ‘Except, of course, his great Muslim

friend - Maulana Azad.’

352-He clutched his arc of grey hair, then turned to his
personal assistant. ‘Get me the Custodian on the phone.’

‘Custodian - of Enemy Property, Sir?’ asked the PA.

Very calmly and slowly and looking him full in the face, the
Home Minister said to his rather scatterbrained PA: ‘There is
no war on. Use what intelligence God has given you. I would
like to talk to the Custodian of Evacuee Property. I will talk to
him in fifteen minutes.’

After a while he continued: ‘Look at our situation today. We
beg America for food, we have to buy whatever we can get
from China and Russia, there’s virtual famine in our
neighbouring state. Last year landless labourers were selling
themselves for five rupees each. And instead of giving the
farmers and the traders a free hand so that they can produce
more and store things better and distribute them efficiently,
Delhi forces us to impose price controls and government
godowns and rationing and every populist and unthought-out
measure possible. It isn’t just their hearts that are soft, it is
their brains as well.’

‘Panditji means well,’ said someone.

‘Means well - means well -‘ sighed L.N. Agarwal. ‘He meant
well when he gave away Pakistan. He meant well when he
gave away half of Kashmir. If it hadn’t been for Patel, we
wouldn’t even have the country that we do. Jawaharlal Nehru
has built up his entire career by meaning well. Gandhiji loved
him because he meant well. And the poor, stupid people love

him because he means well. God save us from people who
mean well. And these well-meaning letters he writes every
month to the Chief Ministers. Why does he bother to write
them? The Chief Ministers are not delighted to read them.’ He
shook his head, and continued: ‘Do you know what they
contain? Long homilies about Korea and the dismissal of
General Mac Arthur. What is General MacArthur to us? - Yet
so noble and sensitive is our Prime Minister that he considers
all the ills of the world to be his own. He means well about
Nepal and Egypt and God knows what else, and expects us to
mean well too. He doesn’t have the least idea of administration
but he talks about the kind of food committees we

353should set up. Nor does he understand our society and our
scriptures, yet he wants to overturn our family life and our
family morals through his wonderful Hindu Code Bill ‘

L.N. Agarwal would have gone on with his own homily for
quite a while if his PA had not said, ‘Sir, the Custodian is on
the line.’

‘All right then,’ said L.N. Agarwal, with a slight wave of his
hand, which the others knew was a signal to withdraw. Til see
you all in the canteen.’

Left alone, the Home Minister talked for ten minutes to the
Custodian of Evacuee Property. The discussion was precise
and cold. For another few minutes the Home Minister sat at
his desk, wondering if he had left any aspect of the matter
ambiguous or vulnerable. He came to the conclusion that he
had not.

He then got up, and walked rather wearily to the Assembly
canteen. In the old days his wife used to send him a tiffin-

carrier containing his simple food prepared exactly the way he
liked it. Now he was at the mercy of indifferent cooks and
their institutional cooking. There was a limit even to
asceticism.

As he walked along the curved corridor he was reminded of
the presence of the central chamber that the corridors
circumscribed - the huge, domed chamber whose height and
majestic elegance made almost trivial the frenetic and partisan
proceedings below. But his insight did not succeed, except
momentarily, in detaching his mind from this morning’s events
and the bitterness that they had aroused in him, nor did it make
him regret in the least what he had been planning and
preparing a few minutes ago.

5.9

THOUGH it had been less than five minutes since he had] sent
off the peon to fetch his Parliamentary Secretary,! Mahesh
Kapoor was waiting in the Legal Remembrancer’s Office with
great impatience. He was alone, as he had sent

354the regular occupants of the office scurrying about to get
various papers and law-books.

‘Ah, Huzoor has brought his presence to the Secretariat at
last!’ he said when he saw Abdus Salaam.

Abdus Salaam did a respectful - or was it ironical? adaab, and
asked what he could do.

Til come to that in a moment. The question is what you’ve
done already.’

‘Already?’ Abdus Salaam was nonplussed.

‘This morning. On the floor of the House. Making a kabab out
of our honourable Home Minister.’

‘I only asked -‘

‘I know what you only asked, Salaam,’ said his Minister with
a smile. Tm asking you why you asked it.’

‘I was wondering why the police -‘

‘My good fool,’ said Mahesh Kapoor fondly, ‘don’t you
realize that Lakshmi Narayan Agarwal thinks I put you up to
it?’

‘You?’

‘Yes, me!’ Mahesh Kapoor was in good humour, thinking of
this morning’s proceedings and his rival’s extreme
discomfiture. ‘It’s exactly the kind of thing he would do so he
imagines the same of me. Tell me’ - he went on ‘did he go to
the canteen for lunch?’

‘Oh, yes.’

‘And was the Chief Minister there? What did he have to say?’

‘No, Sharma Sahib was not there.’

The image of S.S. Sharma eating lunch seated traditionally on
the floor at home, his upper body bare except for his sacred
thread, passed before Mahesh Kapoor’s eyes.

‘No, I suppose not,’ he said with some regret. ‘So, how did he
appear?’

‘You mean Agarwal Sahib? Quite well, I think. Quite
composed.’

‘Uff! You are a useless informant,’ said Mahesh Kapoor
impatiently. ‘Anyway, I’ve been thinking a little about this.
You had better mind what you say or you’ll make things
difficult for both Agarwal and myself. At least restrain

355yourself until the Zamindari Bill has passed. Everyone
needs everyone’s cooperation on that.’

‘All right, Minister Sahib.’

‘Speaking of which, why have these people not returned yet?’
asked Mahesh Kapoor, looking around the Legal
Remembrancer’s Office. ‘I sent them out an hour ago.’ This
was not quite true. ‘Everyone is always late and no one values
time in this country. That’s our main problem Yes, what is it?
Come in, come in,’ he continued,

hearing a light knock at the door.

It was a peon with his lunch, which he usually ate quite late.

Opening his tiffin-carrier, Mahesh Kapoor spared half a
moment’s thought for his wife, who, despite her own ailments,
took such pains on his behalf. April in Brahmpur was almost
unbearable for her because of her allergy to neem blossoms,
and the problem had become increasingly . acute over the
years. Sometimes, when the neem trees were j in flower, she
was reduced to a breathlessness that superfi-1 cially resembled
Fran’s asthma.

5.14

WHEN they got to the Chief Minister’s house fifteen minutes
later, they were immediately admitted to his office, where he
was working late.

After the usual salutations, they were asked to sit down.
Murtaza Ali was sweating - he had been bicycling as fast as he
could, considering the safety of his cargo. But Hassan looked
cool and crisp in his fine white angarkha, if a little sleepy.

‘Now to what do I owe this pleasure?’

The Chief Minister looked from the six-year-old boy to the
Nawab Sahib’s thirty-year-old secretary while nodding his
head slightly from side to side as he sometimes did when tired.

Murtaza Ali had never met the Chief Minister in person. Since
he had no idea how best to approach the matter, he simply
said: ‘Chief Minister Sahib, this letter will tell you
everything.’

The Chief Minister looked over the letter only once, but
slowly. Then in an angry and determined voice, nasal but with
the unmistakable ring of authority, he said:

‘Get me Agarwal on the phone!’

While the call was being connected, the Chief Minister ticked
off Murtaza Ali for having brought the ‘poor boy’ with him so
long past his bedtime. But it had clearly had an effect on his
feelings. He would probably have had harsher things to say,
reflected Murtaza Ali, if I had brought Abbas along as well.

When the call came through, the Chief Minister had a

378few words with the Home Minister. There was no
mistaking the annoyance in his voice.

‘Agarwal, what does this Baitar House business mean?’ asked
the Chief Minister.

After a minute he said :

‘No, I am not interested in all that. I have a good
understanding of what the Custodian’s job is. I cannot have
this sort of thing going on under my nose. Call it off at once.’

A few seconds later he said, even more exasperatedly :

‘No. It will not be sorted out in the morning. Tell the police to
leave immediately. If you have to, put my signature on it.’ He
was about to put down the receiver when he added : ‘And call
me in half an hour.’

After the Chief Minister had put the phone down, he glanced
at Zainab’s letter again. Then he turned to Hassan and said,
shaking his head a little:

‘Go home now, things will be all right.’

5.15

BEGUM ABIDA KHAN (Democratic Party) : I do not
understand what the honourable member is saying. Is he
claiming that we should take the government’s word on this as
on other matters? Does the honourable member not know what
happened just the other day in this city - in Baitar House to be
precise - where on the orders of this government, a gang of
policemen, armed to the teeth, would have set upon the
helpless members of an unprotected zenana and, if it had not
been for the grace of God -

The Hon’ble the Speaker: The honourable member is
reminded that this is not germane to the Zamindari Bill that is
being discussed. I must remind her of the rules of debate and
ask her to refrain from introducing extraneous matter into her
speeches.

Begum Abida Khan : I am deeply grateful to the honourable
Speaker. This House has its own rules, but God too judges us
from above and if I may say so without disrespect

379to this House, God too has his own rules and we will see
which prevails. How can zamindars expect justice from this
government in the countryside where redress is so distant
when even in this city, in the sight of this honourable House,
the honour of other honourable houses is being ravished?

The Hon’ble the Speaker: I will not remind the honourable
member again. If there are further digressions in this vein I
will ask her to resume her seat.

Begum Abida Khan: The honourable Speaker has been very
indulgent with me, and I have no intention of troubling this
House further with my feeble voice. But I will say that the
entire conduct, the entire manner in which this bill has been
created, amended, passed by the Upper House, brought down
to this Lower House and amended drastically yet again by the
government itself shows a lack of faith and a lack of
responsibility, even integrity, with respect to its proclaimed
original intent, and the people of this state will not forgive the
government for this. They have used their brute majority to
force through amendments which are patently mala fide. What
we saw when the bill - as amended by the Legislative Council
- was undergoing its second reading in this Legislative
Assembly was something so shocking that even I - who have
lived through many shocking events in my life - was appalled.
It had been agreed that compensation was to be paid to
landlords. Since they are going to be deprived of their
ancestral means of livelihood, that is the least that we can
expect in justice. But the amount that is being paid is a
pittance - half of which we are expected, indeed enjoined, to
accept in government bonds of uncertain date!

A member: You need not accept it. The treasury will be happy
to keep it warm for you.

Begum Abida Khan : And even that bond-weakened pittance
is on a graduated scale so that the larger landlords many of
whom have establishments on which hundreds of people
depend - managers, relatives, retainers, musicians -

A member: Wrestlers, bullies, courtesans, wastrels -

Begum Abida Khan : - will not be paid in proportion to

380;

the land that is rightfully theirs. What will these poor people
do? Where will they go? The Government does not care. It
thinks that this bill will be popular with the people and it has
an eye on the General Elections that will be taking place in
just a few months. That is the truth of the matter. That is the
real truth and I do not accept any denials from the Minister of
Revenue or his Parliamentary Secretary or the Chief Minister
or anyone. They were afraid that the High Court of Brahmpur
would strike down their graduated scale of payment. So what
did they do at a late stage of the proceedings yesterday - at the
very end of the second reading ? Something that was so
deceitful, so shameful, yet so transparent, that even a child
would be able to see through it. They split up the
compensation into two parts - a non-graduated so-called
compensation - and a graduated so-called Rehabilitation Grant
for zamindars and passed an amendment late in the day to
validate this new scheme of payment. Do they really think the
court will accept that the compensation is ‘equal treatment’ for
all - when by mere jugglery the Revenue Minister and his
Parliamentary Secretary have transferred three-quarters of the

compensation money into another category with a long and
pious name - a category where there is blatantly unequal
treatment of the larger landlords ? You may be assured that we
will fight this injustice while there is breath in our bodies -

A member : Or voice in our lungs.

The Hon’ble the Speaker : I would request members not to
interrupt needlessly the speeches of other members.

Begum Abida Khan : But what is the use of my raising my
voice for justice in a House where all we meet with is mockery
and boorishness ? We are called degenerates and wastrels but
it is the sons of Ministers, believe me, who are the true
proficients of dissipation. The class of people who preserved
the culture, the music, the etiquette of this province is to be
dispossessed, is to be driven through the lanes to beg its bread.
But we will bear our vicissitudes with the dignity that is the
inheritance of the aristocracy. This chamber may rubber-stamp
this bill. The Upper Chamber

381may give it another cursory reading and rubber-stamp it.
The President may sign it blindly. But the courts will vindicate
us. As in our fellow-state of Bihar, this pernicious legislation
will be struck down. And we will fight for justice, yes, before
the bench and in the press and at the hustings - as long as there
is breath in our bodies - and, yes, as long as there is voice in
our lungs.

Shri Devakinandan Rat (Socialist Party) : It has been very
enlightening to be lectured to by the honourable member. I
must confess that I see no likelihood of her begging for her
bread through the lanes of Brahmpur. Perhaps for cake, but I
doubt that too. If I had my way she would not beg for her

bread, but she and those of her class would certainly have to
work for it. This is what simple justice requires, and this is
what is required also by the economic health of this province.
I, and the members of the Socialist Party, agree with the
honourable member who has just spoken that this bill is an
election gimmick by the Congress Party and the government.
But our belief is based on the grounds that this is a toothless
bill, ineffectual and compromised. It does not go anywhere
near what is needed for a thorough overhaul of agricultural
relations in this province.

Compensation for the landlords! What? Compensation for the
blood that they have already sucked from the limbs of a
helpless and oppressed peasantry ? Or compensation for their
God-given right - I notice that the honourable member is in the
habit of invoking God whenever His assistance is required to
strengthen her weak arguments their God-given right to
continue to gorge themselves and their useless train of
unemployed relations on the ghee of this state when the poor
farmer, the poor tenant, the poor landless labourer, the poor
worker can hardly afford half a sip of milk for his hungry
children ? Why is the treasury being depleted? Why are we
writing ourselves and our children into debt with these
promised bonds when this idle and vicious class of zamindars
and taluqdars and landlords of all kinds should be summarily
dispossessed without any thought of compensation - of the
lands that

38zthey are sitting on and have been sitting on for generations
for the sole reason that they betrayed their country at the time
of the Mutiny and were richly rewarded for their treason by
the British ? Is it just, Sir - is it reasonable that they should be
awarded this compensation ? The money that this government
in its culpable so-called generosity is pouring into the laps of
these hereditary oppressors should go into roads and schools,
into housing for the landless and land reclamation, into clinics
and agricultural research centres, not into the luxurious

expenditure which is all that the aristocracy is accustomed to
or capable of.

Mirza Amanat Hussain Khan (Democratic Party) : I rise to a
point of order, Sir. Is the honourable member to be permitted
to wander off the subject and take up the time of the House
with irrelevancies ?

The Hon’ble the Speaker : I think he is not irrelevant. He is
speaking on the general question of the relations between the
tenants, the zamindars, and the government. That question is
more or less before us and any remark which the honourable
member now offers on that point is not irrelevant. You may
like it or not, I may like it or not, but it is not out of order.

Shri Devakinandan Rai : I thank you, Sir. There stands the
naked peasant in the hot sun, and here we sit in our cool
debating rooms and discuss points of order and definitions of
relevancy and make laws that leave him no better than before,
that deprive him of hope, that take the part of the capitalist,
oppressing, exploiting class. Why must the peasant pay for the
land that is his by right, by right of effort, by right of pain, by
right of nature, by right, if you will, of God ? The only reason
why we expect the peasant to pay this huge and unseemly
purchase price to the treasury is in order to finance the
landlord’s exorbitant compensation. End the compensation,
and there will be no need for a purchase price. Refuse to
accept the notion of a purchase price, and any compensation
becomes financially impossible. I have been arguing this point
since the inception of the bill two years ago, and throughout
the second reading last week. But at this stage of the
proceedings

383what can I do ? It is too late. What can I do but say to the
treasury benches : you have set up an unholy alliance with the

landlords and you are attempting to break the spirit of our
people. But we will see what happens when the people realize
how they have been cheated. The General Elections will throw
out this cowardly and compromised government and replace it
with a government worthy of the name : one that springs from
the people, that works for the people and gives no support to
its class enemies.

5.16

THE NAWAB SAHIB had entered the House during the
earlier part of this last speech. He was sitting in the Visitor’s
Gallery, although, had he wished to, he would have been
welcome in the Governor’s Gallery. He had returned from
Baitar the previous day in response to an urgent message from
Brahmpur. He was shocked and embittered by what had
happened and horrified that his daughter had had to face such
a situation virtually on her own. His concern for her had been
so much more patent than his pride in what she had done that
Zainab had not been able to help smiling. For a long time he
had hugged her and his two grandchildren with tears running
down his cheeks. Hassan had been puzzled, but little Abbas
had accepted this as a natural state of affairs and had enjoyed it
all - he could tell that his grandfather was not at all unhappy to
see them. Firoz had been white with anger, and it had taken all
of Imtiaz’s good humour when he arrived late that afternoon,
to calm the family down.

The Nawab Sahib was almost as angry with his hornet of a
sister-in-law as with L.N. Agarwal. He knew that it was she
who had brought this visitation upon their heads. Then, when
the worst was over, she had made light of the police action and
was almost cavalier in her assumption that Zainab would have
handled things with such tactical courage. As for L.N.
Agarwal, the Nawab Sahib looked down onto the floor of the
House, and saw him talking

384very civilly with the Revenue Minister, who had wandered
over to his desk and was conferring with him on some point,
probably floor management with respect to the impending and
critical vote later this afternoon.

The Nawab Sahib had not had the opportunity to talk to his
friend Mahesh Kapoor since his return, nor to convey his
heart-felt thanks to the Chief Minister. He thought that he
would do so after today’s session in the Assembly was over.
But another reason why he was present in the House today was
that he realized - as did many others, for the press and public
galleries were all crowded - that it was a historic occasion. For
him, and for those like him, the impending vote was one that
would - unless halted by the courts - spell a swift and
precipitous decline.

Well, he thought fatalistically, it has to happen sooner or later.
He was under no illusions that his class was a particularly
meritorious one. Those who constituted it included not only a
small number of decent men but also a large number of brutes
and an even larger number of idiots. He remembered a petition
that the Zamindars’ Association had submitted to the
Governor twelve years ago : a good third of the signatories had
used their thumbprints.

Perhaps if Pakistan had not come into existence, the
landowners would have been able to parlay their way into selfpreservation : in a united but unstable India each power-bloc
might have been able to use its critical strength to maintain the
status quo. The princely states, too, could have wielded their
weight, and men such as the Raja of Marh might well have
remained Rajas in fact as well as in name. The ifs and buts of
history, thought the Nawab Sahib, form an insubstantial if
intoxicating diet.

Since the annexation of Brahmpur by the British in the early
18505 the Nawabs of Baitar and other courtiers of the
erstwhile royal house of Brahmpur had not even had the
psychological satisfaction of serving the state, a satisfaction
claimed by many aristocracies widely separated in space and
time. The British had been happy to let the zamindars collect
the revenue from land-rent (and were content in

385practice to allow them whatever they obtained in excess of
the agreed British share) but for the administration of the state
they had trusted no one but civil servants of their own race,
selected in, partially trained in, and imported from England or, later, brown equivalents so close in education and ethos as
made no appreciable difference.

And indeed, apart from racial mistrust, there was, the Nawab
Sahib was compelled to admit, the question of competence.
Most zamindars - himself, alas, perhaps included - could
hardly administer even their own estates and were fleeced by
their munshis and money-lenders. For most of the landlords
the primary question of management was not indeed how to
increase their income but how to spend it. Very few invested it
in industry or urban property. Some, certainly, had spent it on
music and books and the fine arts. Others, like the present
Prime Minister of Pakistan, Liaquat Ali Khan, who had been a
good friend of the Nawab Sahib’s father, had spent it to build
up influence in politics. But for the most part the princes and
landlords had squandered their money on high living of one
kind or another : on hunting or wine or women or opium. A
couple of images flashed irresistibly and unwelcomely across
his mind. One ruler had such a passion for dogs that his entire
life revolved around them : he dreamed, slept, woke,
imagined, fantasized about dogs ; everything he could do was
done to their greater glory. Another was an opium addict who
was only content when a few women were thrown into his lap

; even then, he was not always roused to action ; sometimes he
just snored on.

The Nawab of Baitar’s thoughts continued to oscillate between
the debate on the floor of the Assembly and his own
meditations. At one point there was a brief intervention by
L.N. Agarwal, who made a few amusing comments - at which
even Mahesh Kapoor laughed. The Nawab Sahib stared at the
bald head ringed with a horseshoe of grey hair and wondered
at the thoughts that must be seething under that layer of flesh
and bone. How could a man like this deliberately, indeed
happily, cause so much misery to him and to those he held so
dear? What satisfac-tion could it have given him that the
relatives of someone who had worsted him in a debate would
be dispossessed of the home in which they had spent the
greater part of their lives?

It was now about half-past four, and there was less than half an
hour before the division of votes. The final speeches were
continuing and the Nawab Sahib listened with a somewhat wry
expression as his sister-in-law circumscribed the institution of
zamindari with a luminous purple halo.

Begum Abida Khan : For more than an hour we have been
listening to speech after speech from the government benches,
filled with the most odious self-congratulation. I did not think
that I would wish to speak again, but I must do so now. I
would have thought that it would be more appropriate to let
those people speak whose death and burial you wish to preside
over - I mean the zamindars, whom you wish to deprive of
justice and redress and the means of livelihood. The same
record has been going on and on for an hour - if it is not the
Minister of Revenue it is some pawn of his who has been
trained to sing the same song: His Master’s Voice. I may tell
you that the music is not very pleasant: it is monotonous
without being soothing. It is not the voice of reason or

reasonableness but the voice of majority power and selfrighteousness. But it is pointless to speak further on this.

I pity this government that has lost its way and is trying to find
a path out of the swamp of its own policies. They have no
foresight, and they cannot, they dare not keep their eyes on the
future. It is said that we should ‘Beware of the day that is to
come’, and in the same way I say to this Congress
government: ‘Beware of the time that you are about to bring
upon yourself and upon this country.’ It is three years since we
obtained Independence but look at the poor of the land: they
have neither food to eat nor clothes to wear nor shelter to
protect themselves from the sky. You promised Paradise and
green gardens under which rivers flow, and gulled the people
into believing that the cause of their pitiable condition was
zamindari. Well,zamindari will go, but when your promises of
these green gardens prove to be false, let us see then what the
people say about you and do to you. You are dispossessing
eight lakh people, and openly inviting communism. The
people will soon find out who you are.

What are you doing that we did not do? You are not giving
them the land, you are renting it out just as we did. But what
do you care about them? We lived for generations together, we
were like their fathers and grandfathers, they loved us and we
loved them, we knew their temperament and they knew ours.
They were happy with whatever we gave them, and we were
happy with whatever they gave us. You have come between us
and destroyed what was hallowed by the bonds of ancient
emotion. And the crimes and oppressions you blame on us,
what proof do these poor people have that you will be any
better than you claim we are? They will have to go to the venal
clerk and the gluttonous Sub-Divisional Officer, and they will
be sucked dry. We were never like that. You have separated the
nail from the flesh, and you are happy with the result

As for compensation, I have said enough already. But is this
decency, is this a just provision - that you should go to
someone’s shop and tell him: ‘Give me this and this at such
and such a price’ and if he doesn’t agree to sell it, you take it
anyway? And then when he pleads with you at least to give
him what you promised him, to turn around and you then say,
‘Here is one rupee now, and the rest you will get in instalments
over twenty-five years’?

You may call us all kinds of names and invent all manner of
miseries for us - but the fact is that it is we zamindars who
made this province what it is - who made it strong, who gave it
its special flavour. In every field of life we have made our
contribution, a contribution that will long outlive us, and that
you cannot wipe away. The universities, the colleges, the
traditions of classical music, the schools, the very culture of
this place were established by us. When foreigners and those
from other states in our country come to this province what do
they see - what do

388f

they admire? The Barsaat Mahal, the Shahi Darvaza, the
Imambaras, the gardens and the mansions that have come
down to you from us. These things that are fragrant to the
world you say are filled with the scent of exploitation, of
rotting corpses. Are you not ashamed when you speak in this
vein? When you curse and rob those who created this
splendour and this beauty? When you do not give them
enough compensation even to whitewash the buildings that are
the heritage of this city and this state? This is the worst form
of meanness, this is the grasping attitude of the village
shopkeeper, the bania who smiles and smiles and grasps
without any mercy -

The Hon’ble the Minister for Home Affairs (Shri L.N.
Agarwal) : I hope that the honourable member is not casting
imputations upon my community. This is getting to be
common sport in this House.

Begum Abida Khan : You understand very well what I am
saying, you who are a master at twisting words and
manipulating the law. But I will not waste my time arguing
with you. Today you have made common cause with the
Minister of Revenue in the shameful exploitation of a
scapegoat class, but tomorrow will show you what such
friendships of convenience are worth - and when you look
around for friends everyone will have turned their face away
from you. Then you will remember this day and what I have
said, and you and your government will come to wish that you
had behaved with greater justice and humanity.

There followed an extremely long-winded speech by a
socialist member; and then the Chief Minister S.S. Sharma
talked for about five minutes, thanking various people for their
role in shaping this legislation -^ particularly Mahesh Kapoor,
the Minister of Revenue, and Abdus Salaam, his Parliamentary
Secretary. He advised the landowners to live in amity with
their erstwhile tenants when the divestiture of their property
took place. They should live together like brothers, he stated
mildly and nasally. It was an opportunity for the landlords to
show their goodness of heart.

389They should think of the teachings of Gandhiji and devote
their lives to the service of their fellow-men. Finally Mahesh
Kapoor, the chief architect of the bill, got the chance to round
off the debate in the House. But time was too short for him to
say more than a few words :

The Hon’ble the Minister of Revenue (Shri Mahesh Kapoor) :
Mr Speaker, I had hoped that my friend from the socialist
benches who talked so movingly of equality and a classless
society and took the Government to task for producing an
impotent and unjust bill, would be a just man himself and
would confer some equality on me. It is the end of the last day.
If he had taken a little less time for his speech I would have
had a little more. As it is I now have barely two minutes to
speak. He claimed that my bill was a measure created with the
intention merely of preventing revolution - a revolution that he
believes to be desirable. If that is so, I would be interested to
see which way he and his party vote in a couple of minutes.
After the honourable Chief Minister’s words of thanks and
advice advice which I sincerely hope will be taken by the
landlords - I have nothing to add except a few further words of
thanks - to my colleagues in this section of the House and, yes,
in that section too, who have made the passage of this bill
possible, and to the officers of the Revenue Department and
the Printing Department and the Law Department, in particular
the drafting cell and the Office of the Legal Remembrancer. I
thank them all for their months and years of assistance and
advice, and I hope that I speak for the people of Purva Pradesh
when I say that my thanks are not merely personal.

The Hon’ble the Speaker : The question before the House is
that the Purva Pradesh Zamindari Abolition Bill of original
date 1948 as passed by the Legislative Assembly, amended by
the Legislative Council and further amended by the
Legislative Assembly, be passed.

The motion was put and the House passed the bill by a large
majority, consisting mainly of the Congress Party,

390whose numbers dominated the House. The Socialist Party
had to vote, however reluctantly, in favour of the bill on the
grounds that half a loaf was better than none, and despite the

fact that it somewhat assuaged the hunger that would have
allowed them to flourish. Had they voted against it they would
never have lived it down. The Democratic Party voted against
it unanimously, also as expected. The smaller parties and
Independents voted predominantly for the bill.

Begum Abida Khan : With the permission of the Speaker I
would like a minute’s time to say something.

The Hon’ble the Speaker: I will give you a minute’s time.

Begum Abida Khan: I would like to say on behalf of myself
and the Democratic Party that the advice given by the pious
and honourable Chief Minister to the zamindars - that they
should maintain good relations with their tenants - is very
valuable advice, and I thank him for it. But we would have
maintained such excellent relations anyway regardless of his
excellent advice, and regardless of the passage of this bill this bill which will force so many people into poverty and
unemployment, which will utterly destroy the economy and
culture of this province, and which will at the same time grant
not the least benefit to those who -

The Hon’ble the Minister of Revenue (Shri Mahesh Kapoor) :
Mr Speaker, what sort of occasion is this for speech-making?

The Hon’ble the Speaker: I gave her permission merely to
make a short statement. I would request the honourable
member -

Begum Abida Khan: As a result of its unjust passage by a
brute majority we are left at this time with no other
constitutional means of expressing our displeasure and sense
of injustice other than to walk out of this House, which is a
constitutional recourse, and I therefore call upon the members
of my party to stage a walk-out to protest the passage of this
bill.

391The members of the Democratic Party walked out of the
Assembly. There were a few hisses and cries of ‘Shame!’ but
for the most part the Assembly was silent. It was the end of the
day, so the gesture was symbolic rather than effective. After a
few moments, the Speaker adjourned the House until eleven
o’clock the next morning. Mahesh Kapoor gathered his papers
together, looked up at the huge, frosted dome, sighed, then
allowed his gaze to wander around the slowly emptying
chamber. He looked across at the gallery and his eye caught
that of the Nawab Sahib. They nodded at each other in a
gesture of greeting that was almost entirely friendly, though
the discomfort of the situation - not quite an irony - was lost
on neither of them. Neither of them wished to talk to the other
just yet, and each of them understood this. So Mahesh Kapoor
continued to put his papers in order, and the Nawab Sahib,
stroking his beard in thought, walked out of the gallery to look
for the Chief Minister.

392-Part Six6.1

ARRIVING at the Haridas College of Music, Ustad Majeed
Khan nodded absently to a couple of other music teachers,
grimaced with distaste at two female kathak dancers who were
carrying their jangling anklets into a nearby practice room on
the ground floor, and arrived at the closed door of his room.
Outside the room, in casual disarray, lay three sets of chappals
and one pair of shoes. Ustad Majeed Khan, realizing that this
meant that he was forty-five minutes late, sighed a halfirritated and’ half-exhausted ‘Ya Allah’, took off his own
peshawari chappals, and entered the room.

The room that he entered was a plain, rectangular,
highceilinged box with not very much natural light. What few
rays came in from outside were provided by a small skylight
high on the far wall. On the wall to the left as he entered was a
long cupboard with a rack where a number of tanpuras were
resting. On the floor was a pale blue unpatterned cotton rug;
this had been quite difficult to obtain, as most of the rugs
available on the market had floral or other designs of one kind
or another. But he had insisted on having a plain rug so that he
would not be distracted in his music, and the authorities had
very surprisingly agreed to find him one. On the rug facing
him sat a short, fat young man whom he had never seen; the
man stood up as soon as he entered. Facing away from him
were seated a young man and two young women. They turned
when the door opened, and immediately they saw it was him,
got up respectfully to greet him. One of the women - it was
Malati Trivedi - even bent down to touch his feet. Ustad
Majeed Khan was not displeased. As she got up he said
reprovingly to her :

‘So you’ve decided to make a reappearance, have you ? Now
that the university is closed I suppose I can expect to see my
classes fill up again. Everyone talks about their devotion to
music but during examination time they disappear like rabbits
into their burrows.’

The Ustad then turned to the stranger. This was Motu

395Chand, the plump tabla player who as a rule accompanied
Saeeda Bai. Ustad Majeed Khan, surprised to see someone
whom he did not immediately recognize in place of his regular
tabla player, looked at him sternly and said, ‘Yes ?’

Motu Chand, smiling benignly, said, ‘Excuse me, Ustad Sahib,
for my presumption. Your regular tabla player, my wife’s
sister’s husband’s friend, is not well and he asked me if I
would stand in for him today.’

‘Do you have a name ?’

‘Well, they call me Motu Chand, but actually -‘

‘Hmmh!’ said Ustad Majeed Khan, picked up his tanpura from
the rack, sat down and began to tune it. His students sat down
as well, but Motu Chand continued standing.

‘Oh-hoh, sit down,’ said Ustad Majeed Khan irritably, not
deigning to look at Motu Chand.

As he was tuning his tanpura, Ustad Majeed Khan looked up,
wondering to which of the three students he would give the
first fifteen-minute slot. Strictly speaking, it belonged to the
boy, but because a bright ray from the skylight happened to
fall on Malati’s cheerful face Ustad Majeed Khan decided on a
whim to ask her to begin. She got up, fetched one of the
smaller tanpuras, and began to tune it. Motu Chand adjusted
the pitch of his tabla accordingly.

‘Now which raag was I teaching you - Bhairava ?’ asked
Ustad Majeed Khan.

‘No, Ustad Sahib, Ramkali,’ said Malati, gently strumming the
tanpura which she had laid flat on the rug in front of her.

‘Hmmm!’ said Ustad Majeed Khan. He began to sing a few
slow phrases of the raag and Malati repeated the phrases after
him. The other students listened intently. From the low notes
of the raag the Ustad moved to its upper reaches and then, with
an indication to Motu Chand to begin playing the tabla in a
rhythmic cycle of sixteen beats, he began to sing the
composition that Malati had been learning. Although Malati
did her best to concentrate, she was distracted by the entrance
of two more students -

396

^’•both girls - who paid their respects to Ustad Majeed Khan
before sitting down.

Clearly the Ustad was in a good mood once again; at one point
he stopped singing to comment: ‘So, you really want to
become a doctor ?’ Turning away from Malati, he added
ironically, ‘With a voice like hers she will cause more
heartache than even she will be able to cure, but if she wants
to be a good musician she cannot give it second place in her
life.’ Then, turning back to Malati he said, ‘Music requires as
much concentration as surgery. You can’t disappear for a
month in the middle of an operation and take it up at will.’

‘Yes, Ustad Sahib,’ said Malati Trivedi with the suspicion of a
smile.

‘A woman as a doctor!’ said Ustad Majeed Khan, musing. ‘All
right, all right, let us continue - which part of the composition
were we at ?’

His question was interrupted by a prolonged series of thumps
from the room above. The bharatnatyam dancers had begun
their practice. Unlike the kathak dancers whom the Ustad had
glared at in the hall, they did not wear anklets for their practice
session. But what they lost in tinkling distraction they more
than compensated for in the vigour with which they pounded
their heels and soles on the floor directly above. Ustad Majeed
Khan’s brows blackened and he abruptly terminated the lesson
he was giving Malati.

The next student was the boy. He had a good voice and had
put in a lot of work between lessons, but for some reason
Ustad Majeed Khan treated him rather abruptly. Perhaps he
was still upset by the bharatnatyam which sounded
sporadically from above. The boy left as soon as his lesson
was over.

Meanwhile, Veena Tandon entered, sat down, and began to
listen. She looked troubled. She sat next to Malati, whom she
knew both as a fellow-student of music and as a friend of
Lata’s. Motu Chand, who was facing them while playing,
thought that they made an interesting contrast: Malati with her
fair, fine features, brownish hair, and

397slightly amused green eyes, and Veena with her darker,
plumper features, black hair, and dark eyes, animated but
anxious.

After the boy came the turn of a cheerful but shy middle-aged
Bengali woman, whose accent Ustad Majeed Khan enjoyed
mimicking. She would normally come in the evenings, and at
present he was teaching her Raag Malkauns. This she would
sometimes call ‘Malkosh’ to the amusement of the Ustad.

‘So you’ve come in the morning today,’ said Ustad Majeed
Khan. ‘How can I teach you Malkosh in the morning?’

‘My husband says I should come in the morning,’ said the
Bengali lady.

‘So you are willing to sacrifice your art for your marriage ?’
asked the Ustad.

‘Not entirely,’ said the Bengali lady, keeping her eyes down.
She had three children, and was bringing them up well, but
was still incurably shy, especially when criticized by her
Ustad.

‘What do you mean, not entirely ?’

‘Well,’ said the lady, ‘my husband would prefer me to sing not
classical music but Rabindrasangeet.’

‘Hmmh!’ said Ustad Majeed Khan. That the sickly-sweet socalled music of Rabindranath Tagore’s songs should be more
attractive to any man’s ears than the beauty of classical khyaal
clearly marked such a man as a buffoon. To the shy Bengali

woman, the Ustad said in a tone of lenient contempt: ‘So I
expect he’ll be asking you to sing him a “gojol” next.’

At his cruel mispronunciation the Bengali lady retreated
entirely into a flustered silence, but Malati and Veena glanced
at each other with amusement.

Ustad Majeed Khan, apropos of his earlier lesson, said: ‘The
boy has a good voice and he works hard, but he sings as if he
were in church. It must be his earlier training in western
music. It’s a good tradition in its own way,’ he went on
tolerantly. Then, after a pause, he continued, ‘But you can’t
unlearn it. The voice vibrates too much in the

398wrong kind of way. Hmm.’ He turned to the Bengali
woman : ‘Tune the tanpura down to the “ma” ; I may as well
teach you your “Malkosh”. One should not leave a raag halftaught even if it is the wrong time of day to sing it. But then I
suppose one can set yogurt in the morning and eat it at night.’

Despite her nervousness, the Bengali lady acquitted herself
well. The Ustad let her improvise a little on her own, and even
said an encouraging ‘May you live long!’ a couple of times. If
the truth be told, music mattered more to the Bengali lady than
her husband and her three wellbrought-up sons, but it was
impossible, given the constraints of her life, for her to give it
priority. The Ustad was pleased with her and gave her a longer
lesson than usual. When it was over, she sat quietly to one side
to listen to what was to follow.

What followed was Veena Tandon’s lesson. She was to sing
Raag Bhairava, for which the tanpura had to be retuned to
‘pa’. But so distracted was she by various worries about her
husband and her son that she began to strum it immediately.

‘What raag are you studying ?’ said Ustad Majeed Khan,
slightly puzzled. ‘Isn’t it Bhairava ?’

‘Yes, Guruji,’ said Veena, somewhat perplexed herself.

‘Guruji ?’ said Ustad Majeed Khan in a voice that would have
been indignant if it had not been so astonished. Veena was one
of his favourite pupils, and he could not imagine what had got
into her.

‘Ustad Sahib,’ Veena corrected herself. She too was surprised
that in addressing her Muslim teacher she had used the title of
respect due to a Hindu one.

Ustad Majeed Khan continued : ‘And if you are singing
Bhairava, don’t you think it would be a good idea to retune the
tanpura ?’

‘Oh,’ said Veena, looking down in surprise at the tanpura, as if
it were somehow to blame for her own absence of mind.

After she had re-tuned it, the Ustad sang a few phrases of a
slow alaap for her to imitate, but her performance

399was so unsatisfactory that at one point he said sharply to
her: ‘Listen. Listen first. Listen first, then sing. Listening is
fifteen annas in the rupee. Reproducing it is one anna - it’s the
work of a parrot. Are you worried about something ?’ Veena
did not think it right to speak of her anxieties before her
teacher, and Ustad Majeed Khan continued: ‘Why don’t you

strum the tanpura so that I can hear it ? You should eat
almonds for breakfast - that will increase your strength. All
right, let’s go on to the composition Jaago Mohan Pyaare,’ he
added impatiently.

Motu Chand started the rhythmic cycle on the tabla and they
began to sing. The words of the well-known composition lent
stability to Veena’s unsteady thoughts and the increasing
confidence and liveliness of her singing pleased Ustad Majeed
Khan. After a while first Malati, and then the Bengali woman
got up to leave. The word ‘gojol’ flashed through the Ustad’s
mind and it dawned upon him where he had heard of Motu
Chand before. Wasn’t he the tabla player who accompanied
the ghazals of Saeeda Bai, that desecrater of the holy shrine of
music, the courtesan who served the notorious Raja of Marh ?
One thought led to another; he turned abruptly towards Veena
and said, ‘If your father, the Minister, is bent upon destroying
our livelihood, at least he can protect our religion.’

Veena stopped singing and looked at him in bewildered
silence. She realized that ‘livelihood’ referred to the patronage
of the great rural landlords whose lands the Zamindari
Abolition Bill was attempting to snatch away. But what the
Ustad Sahib meant by a threat to his religion, she could not
comprehend at all.

‘Tell him that,’ continued Ustad Majeed Khan.

‘I will, Ustad Sahib,’ said Veena in a subdued voice.

‘The Congress-wallahs will finish Nehru and Maulana Azad
and Rafi Sahib off. And our worthy Chief Minister and Home
Minister will sooner or later suppress your father as well. But
while he has some political life, he can do something to help

those of us who depend on the likes of him for protection.
Once they start singing their bhajans

400from the temple while we are at prayer, it can only end
badly.’

Veena realized that Ustad Majeed Khan was referring to the
Shiva Temple being constructed in Chowk, only a couple of
lanes away from Ustad Majeed Khan’s house.

After humming to himself for a few seconds the Ustad paused,
cleared his throat and said, almost to himself: ‘It is becoming
unlivable in our area. Apart from Marh’s madness, there is the
whole insane business of Misri Mandi. It’s amazing,’ he went
on : ‘the whole place is on strike, no one ever works, and all
they do is yell slogans and threats at each other. The small
shoemakers starve and scream, the traders tighten their belts
and bluster, and there are no shoes in the stores, no
employment in the whole Mandi. Everyone’s interests are
harmed, yet no one will compromise. And this is Man whom
God has made out of a clot of blood, and to whom he has
given reason and discrimination.’

The Ustad finished his comment with a dismissive wave of his
hand, a wave that implied that everything he had ever thought
about human nature had been confirmed.

Seeing Veena look even more upset, an expression of concern
passed over Majeed Khan’s face. ‘Why am I telling you this?’
he said, almost in self-reproach. ‘Your husband knows all this
better than I do. So that’s why you are distracted - of course, of
course.’

Veena, moved though she was by this expression of sympathy
from the normally unsympathetic Ustad, was silent, and
continued to strum the tanpura. They resumed where they had
left off, but it must have been obvious that her mind was not
on the composition or the rhythmic patterns - the ‘taans’ which followed. At one point, the Ustad said to her: ‘You’re
singing the word “ga”, “ga”, “ga”, but is that really the note
“ga” you are singing? I think you have too much on your
mind. You should leave such things with your shoes outside
this room when you come in.’

He began to sing a complex series of taans, and Motu Chand,
carried away by the pleasure of the music, started

401to improvise a pleasant filigree of rhythmic
accompaniment on the tabla. The Ustad abruptly stopped.

He turned to Motu Chand with sarcastic deference. ‘Please go
on, Guruji,’ he said.

The tabla player smiled embarrassedly.

‘No, do go on, we were enjoying your solo,’ continued Ustad
Majeed Khan.

Motu Chand’s smile became unhappier still.

‘Do you know how to play a simple theka - the plain
unornamented rhythmic cycle ? Or are you in too high a circle
of Paradise for that ?’

Motu Chand looked pleadingly at Ustad Majeed Khan and
said, ‘It was the beauty of your singing that carried me away,
Ustad Sahib. But I won’t let it happen again.’

Ustad Majeed Khan looked sharply at him, but he had
intended no impertinence.

After her lesson was over, Veena got up to leave. Normally she
stayed as long as she could, but this was not possible today.
Bhaskar had a fever and wanted her attention ; Kedarnath
needed cheering up ; and her mother-inlaw had just that
morning made a hurtful comment on the amount of time she
spent at the Haridas College of Music.

The Ustad glanced at his watch. There was still an hour before
the noon prayer. He thought of the call to prayer which he
heard every morning first from his local mosque and then at
slightly staggered intervals from other mosques across the city.
What he particularly liked in the morning call to prayer was
the twice-repeated line that did not appear in the azaan later in
the day : ‘Prayer is better than sleep.’

Music too was prayer to him, and some mornings he would be
up long before dawn to sing Lalit or some other early morning
raag. Then the first words of the azaan, ‘Allah-u-Akbar’ - God
is Great - would vibrate across the rooftops in the cool air and
his ears would lie in wait for the sentence that admonished
those who attempted to sleep on. When he heard it, he would
smile. It was one of the pleasures of his day.

If the new Shiva Temple was built, the sound of the

402muezzin’s early cry would be challenged by that of the
conch. The thought was unbearable. Surely something must be
done to prevent it. Surely the powerful Minister Mahesh
Kapoor - who was taunted by some in his party for being, like
the Prime Minister Jawaharlal Nehru, almost an honorary
Muslim - could do something about it. The Ustad began
meditatively to hum the words of the composition that he had
just been teaching the Minister’s daughter - Jaago Mohan
Pyaare. Humming it, he forgot himself. He forgot the room he
was in and the students still waiting for their lessons. It was
very far from his mind that the words were addressed to the
dark god Krishna, asking him to wake up with the arrival of
morning, or that ‘Bhairava’ the name of the raag he was
singing - was an epithet of the great god Shiva himself.

6.2

ISHAQ KHAN, Saeeda Bai’s sarangi player, had been trying
for several days to help his sister’s husband - who was also a
sarangi player - to get transferred from All India Radio
Lucknow, where he was a ‘staff artist’, to All India Radio
Brahmpur.

This morning too, Ishaq Khan had gone down to the AIR
offices and tried his luck by talking to an assistant producer of
music, but to no avail. It was a bitter business for the young
man to realize that he could not even get to state his case
properly to the Station Director. He did, however, state his
case vociferously to a couple of musician friends he met there.
The sun was warm, and they sat under a large and shady neem
tree on the lawn outside the buildings. They looked at the
cannas and talked of this and that. One of them had a radio - of
a newfangled kind that could be operated by batteries - and
they switched it on to the only station they could receive
clearly, which was their own.

The unmistakable voice of Ustad Majeed Khan singing Raag
Miya-ki-Todi filled their ears. He had just begun

403singing and was accompanied only by the tabla and his
own tanpura.

It was glorious music : grand, stately, sad, full of a deep sense
of calm. They stopped gossiping and listened. Even an orangecrested hoopoe stopped pecking around the flowerbed for a
minute.

As always with Ustad Majeed Khan, the clean unfolding of the
raag occurred through a very slow rhythmic section rather than
a rhythmless alaap. After about fifteen minutes he turned to a
faster composition in the raag, and then, far, far too soon, Raag
Todi was over, and a children’s programme was on the air.

Ishaq Khan turned off the radio and sat still, deep more in
trance than in thought.

After a while they got up and went to the AIR staff canteen.
Ishaq Khan’s friends, like his brother-in-law, were staff artists,
with fixed hours and assured salaries. Ishaq Khan, who had
only accompanied other musicians a few times on the air, fell
into the category of ‘casual artist’.

The small canteen was crowded with musicians, writers of
programmes, administrators, and waiters. A couple of peons
lounged against the wall. The entire scene was messy, noisy
and cosy. The canteen was famous for its strong tea and
delicious samosas. A board facing the entrance proclaimed
that no credit would be given ; but as the musicians were
perennially short of cash, it always was.

Every table except one was crowded. Ustad Majeed Khan sat
alone at the head of the table by the far wall, musing and
stirring his tea. Perhaps out of deference to him, because he
was considered something better than even an A-grade artist,
no one presumed to sit near him. For all the apparent
camaraderie and democracy of the canteen, there were
distinctions. B-grade artists for instance would not normally sit
with those of superior classifications such as B-plus or A unless, of course, they happened to be their disciples - and
would usually defer to them even in speech.

Ishaq Khan looked around the room and, seeing five

404empty chairs ranged down the oblong length of Ustad
Majeed Khan’s table, moved towards it. His two friends
followed a little hesitantly.

As they approached, a few people from another table got up,
perhaps because they were performing next on the air. But
Ishaq Khan chose to ignore this, and walked up to Ustad
Majeed Khan’s table. ‘May we?’ he asked politely. As the
great musician was lost in some other world, Ishaq and his
friends sat down at the three chairs at the opposite J end. There
were still two empty chairs, one on either side of Majeed
Khan. He did not seem to register the presence of the new
arrivals, and was now drinking his tea with both hands on the
cup, though the weather was warm.

Ishaq sat at the other end facing Majeed Khan, and looked at
that noble and arrogant face, softened as it appeared to be by
some transient memory or thought rather than by the
permanent impress of late middle age.

So profound had the effect of his brief performance of Raag
Todi been on Ishaq that he wanted desperately to convey his
appreciation. Ustad Majeed Khan was not a tall man, but
seated either on the stage in his long black achkan - so tightly
buttoned at the neck that one would have thought it would
constrict his voice - or even at a table drinking tea, he
conveyed, through his upright, rigid stance, a commanding
presence; indeed, even an illusion of height. At the moment he
seemed almost unapproachable.

If only he would say something to me, thought Ishaq, I would
tell him what I felt about his performance. He must know we
are sitting here. And he used to know my father. There were
many things that the younger man did not like about the elder,
but the music he and his friends had just listened to placed
them in their trivial perspective.

They ordered their tea. The service in the canteen, despite the
fact that it was part of a government organization, was prompt.
The three friends began to talk among themselves. Ustad
Majeed Khan continued to sip his tea in silence and
abstraction.

Ishaq was quite popular in spite of his slightly sarcastic nature,
and had a number of good friends. He was always

405willing to take the errands and burdens of others upon
himself. After his father’s death he and his sister had had to
support their three young brothers. This was one reason why it
was important that his sister’s family move from Lucknow to
Brahmpur.

One of Ishaq’s two friends, a tabla player, now made the
suggestion that Ishaq’s brother-in-law change places with

another sarangi player, Rafiq, who was keen to move to
Lucknow.

‘But Rafiq is a B-plus artist. What’s your brother-inlaw’s
grade ?’ asked Ishaq’s other friend.

‘B.’

‘The Station Director won’t want to lose a B-plus for a B.
Still, you can try.’

Ishaq picked up his cup, wincing slightly as he did so, and
sipped his tea.

‘Unless he can upgrade himself,’ continued his friend. ‘I
agree, it’s a silly system, to grade someone in Delhi on the
basis of a single tape of a performance, but that’s the system
we have.’

‘Well,’ said Ishaq, remembering his father who, in the last
years of his life, had made it to A, ‘it’s not a bad system. It’s
impartial - and ensures a certain level of competence.’

‘“Competence’!’ ‘it was*ÙstaàMà]eeà”R!han spea’kmg. The
three friends looked at him in amazement. The word was
spoken with a contempt that seemed to come from the deepest
level of his being. ‘Mere pleasing competence is not worth
having.’

Ishaq looked at Ustad Majeed Khan, deeply disquieted. The
memory of his father made him bold enough to speak.

‘Khan Sahib, for someone like you, competence is not

even a question. But for the rest of us ‘ His voice trailed

off.

Ustad Majeed Khan, displeased at being even mildly
contradicted, sat tight-lipped and silent. He seemed to be
collecting his thoughts. After a while he spoke.

‘You should not have a problem,’ he said. ‘For a sarangiwallah no great musicianship is required. You don’t

406need to be a master of a style. Whatever style the soloist
has, you simply follow it. In musical terms it’s actually a
distraction.’ He continued in an indifferent voice : ‘If you want
my help I’ll speak to the Station Director. He knows I’m
impartial - I don’t need or use sarangi-wallahs. Rafiq or your
sister’s husband - it hardly matters who is where.’

Ishaq’s face had gone white. Without thinking of what he was
doing or where he was, he looked straight at Majeed Khan and
said in a bitter and cutting voice :

‘I have no objection to being called a mere sarangiwallah
rather than a sarangiya by a great man. I consider myself
blessed that he has deigned to notice me. But these are matters
about which Khan Sahib has personal knowledge. Perhaps he
can elaborate on the uselessness of the instrument.’

It was no secret that Ustad Majeed Khan himself came from a
family of hereditary sarangi players. His artistic strivings as a
vocalist were bound up painfully with another endeavour: the
attempt to dissociate himself from the demeaning sarangi
tradition and its historical connection with courtesans and
prostitutes - and to associate himself and his son and daughter
with the so-called ‘kalawant’ families of higher-caste
musicians.

But the taint of the sarangi was too strong, and no kalawant
family wanted to marry into Majeed Khan’s. This was one of
the searing disappointments of his life. Another was that his
music would end with himself, for he had never found a
disciple whom he considered worthy of his art. His own son
had the voice and musicianship of a frog. As for his daughter,
she was musical all right, but the last thing that Ustad Majeed
Khan wanted for her was that she should develop her voice
and become a singer.

Ustad Majeed Khan cleared his throat but said nothing.

The thought of the great artist’s treason, the contempt with
which Majeed Khan, despite his own undoubted gifts, had
treated the tradition that had given him birth continued to
enrage Ishaq.

‘Why does Khan Sahib not favour us with a response ?’ he
went on, oblivious to his friends’ attempts to restrain

407him. ‘There are subjects, no matter how distanced he is
today, on which Khan Sahib can illuminate our understanding.
Who else has the background ? We have heard of Khan
Sahib’s illustrious father and grandfather.’

‘Ishaq, I knew your father, and I knew your grandfather. They
were men who understood the meaning of respect and
discrimination.’

‘They looked at the worn grooves on their fingernails without
feeling dishonoured,’ retorted Ishaq.

The people at the neighbouring tables had stopped talking, and
were listening to the exchange between the younger and the
older man. That Ishaq, baited himself, was now doing the
baiting, attempting to hurt and humiliate Ustad Majeed Khan,
was painful and obvious. The scene was horrible, but everyone
seemed to be frozen into immobility.

Ustad Majeed Khan said slowly and passionlessly : ‘But they,
believe me, would have felt dishonoured if they had been alive
to see their son flirting with the sister of an employer, whose
body his bow helps sell.’

He looked at his watch and got up. He had another
performance in ten minutes. Almost to himself and with the
utmost simplicity and sincerity, he said, ‘Music is not a cheap
spectacle - not the entertainment of the brothel. It is
\ikeprayer.’

Before Ishaq could respond he had started walking towards the
door. Ishaq got up and almost lunged towards him. He was
gripped by an uncontrollable spasm of pain and fury, and his
two friends had to force him bodily down into his chair. Other
people joined in, for Ishaq was well-liked, and had to be
prevented from doing further damage.

‘Ishaq Bhai, enough’s been said.’

‘Listen, Ishaq, one must swallow it - whatever our elders say,
however bitter.’

‘Don’t ruin yourself. Think of your brothers. If he talks to the
Director Sahib ‘

‘Ishaq Bhai, how many times have I told you to guard your
tongue!’

408’Listen, you must apologize to him immediately.’

But Ishaq was almost incoherent :

‘Never - never - I’ll never apologize - on my father’s grave - to
that - to think, that such a man who insults the memory of his
elders and mine - everyone creeps on all fours before him yes, Khan Sahib, you can have a twenty-five-minute slot - yes,
yes, Khan Sahib, you decide which raag you will sing - O God
! If Miya Tansen were alive he would have cried to hear him
sing his raag today - 8 that God should have given him this gift
-‘

‘Enough, enough, Ishaq ‘ said an old sitar player.

Ishaq turned towards him with tears of hurt and anger :

‘Would you marry your son to his daughter? Or your daughter
to his son ? Who is he that God is in his pocket ?

- he talks like a mullah about prayer and devotion - this man
who spent half his youth in Tarbuz ka Bazaar -‘

People began to turn away in pity and discomfort from Ishaq.
Several of Ishaq’s well-wishers left the canteen to try and
pacify the insulted maestro, who was about to agitate the
airwaves in his own great agitation.

‘Khan Sahib, the boy didn’t know what he was saying.’

Ustad Majeed Khan, who was almost at the door of the studio,
said nothing.

‘Khan Sahib, elders have always treated their youngers like
children, with tolerance. You must not take what he said
seriously. None of it is true.’

Ustad Majeed Khan looked at the intercéder and said: ‘If a dog
pisses on my achkan, do I become a tree ?’

The sitar player shook his head and said, ‘I know it was the
worst time he could have chosen - when you were about to
perform, Ustad Sahib….’

But Ustad Majeed Khan went on to sing a Hindol of calm and
surpassing beauty.

6.3

IT had been some days since Saeeda Bai had saved Maan from
suicide, as he put it. Of course it was extremely

409unlikely - and his friend Firoz had told him so when he had
complained to him of his lovelorn miseries - that that happygo-lucky young man would have made any attempt even to cut
himself while shaving in order to prove his passion for her.
But Maan knew that Saeeda Bai, though hard-headed, was - at
least to him - tender-hearted ; and although he knew she did
not believe that he was in any danger from himself if she
refused to make love to him, he also knew that she would take
it as more than a merely flattering figure of speech. Everything
is in the saying, and Maan, while saying that he could not go
on in this harsh world without her, had been as soulful as it
was possible for him to be. For a while all his past loves
vanished from his heart. The dozen or more ‘girls of good
family’ from Brahmpur whom he had been in love with and
who in general had loved him in return, ceased to exist. Saeeda
Bai - for that moment at least - became everything for him.

And after they had made love, she became more than
everything for him. Like that other source of domestic strife,
Saeeda Bai too made hungry where most she satisfied. Part of
it was simply the delicious skill with which she made love.
But even more than that it was her nakhra, the art of pretended
hurt or disaffection that she had learnt from her mother and
other courtesans in the early days in Tarbuz ka Bazaar. Saeeda
Bai practised this with such curious restraint that it became
infinitely more believable. One tear, one remark that implied perhaps, only perhaps implied - that something he had said or
done had caused her injury - and Maan’s heart would go out to
her. No matter what the cost to himself, he would protect her
from the cruel, censorious world. For minutes at a time he
would lean over her shoulder and kiss her neck, glancing every

few moments at her face in the hope of seeing her mood lift.
And when it did, and he saw that same bright, sad smile that
had so captivated him when she sang at Holi at Prem Nivas, he
would be seized by a frenzy of sexual desire. Saeeda Bai
seemed to know this, and graced him with a smile only when
she herself was in the mood to satisfy him.

410She had framed one of the paintings from the album of
Ghalib’s poems that Maan had given her. Although she had, as
far as was possible, repaired the page that the Raja of Marh
had ripped out of the volume, she had not dared to display that
particular illustration for fear of exciting his further fury. What
she had framed was ‘A Persian Idyll’, which showed a young
woman dressed in pale orange, sitting near an arched doorway
on a very pale orange rug, holding in her slender fingers a
musical instrument resembling a sitar, and looking out of the
archway into a mysterious garden. The woman’s features were
sharp and delicate, unlike Saeeda Bai’s very attractive but
unclassical, perhaps not even beautiful, face. And the
instrument that the woman was holding - unlike Saeeda Bai’s
strong and responsive harmonium - was so finely tapered in
the stylized illustration that it would have been entirely
impossible to play it.

Maan did not care that the book might be considered damaged
by having the painting thus plundered from its pages. He could
not have been happier at this sign of Saeeda Bai’s attachment
to his gift. He lay in her bedroom and stared at the painting
and was filled with a happiness as mysterious as the garden
through the archway. Whether glowing with the immediate
memory of her embraces or chewing contentedly at the
delicate coconut-flavoured paan that she had just offered to
him at the end of a small ornamented silver pin, it seemed to
him that he himself had been led by her and her music and her
affection into a paradisal garden, most insubstantial and yet
most real.

‘How unimaginable it is,’ said Maan out loud rather dreamily,
‘that our parents also must.have - just like us -‘

This remark struck Saeeda Bai as being in somewhat poor
taste. She did not at all wish her imagination to be transported
to the domestic love-making of Mahesh Kapoor - or anyone
else for that matter. She did not know who her own father was:
her mother, Mohsina Bai, had claimed not to know. Besides,
domesticity and its standard concerns were not objects of fond
contemplation for her. She had been accused by Brahmpur
gossip of destroying

411several settled marriages by casting her lurid nets around
hapless men. She said a little sharply to Maan :

‘It is good to live in a household like I do where one does not
have to imagine such things.’

Maan looked a little chastened. Saeeda Bai, who was quite
fond of him by now and knew that he usually blurted out the
first thing that came into his head, tried to cheer him up by
saying :

‘But Dagh Sahib looks distressed. Would he have been happier
to have been immaculately conceived ?’

‘I think so,’ said Maan. ‘I sometimes think I would be happier
without a father.’

‘Oh ?’ said Saeeda Bai, who had clearly not been expecting
this.

‘Oh, yes,’ said Maan. ‘I often feel that whatever I do my father
looks upon with contempt. When I opened the cloth business
in Banaras, Baoji told me it would be a complete failure. Now
that I have made a go of it, he is taking the line that I should sit
there every day of every month of every year of my life. Why
should I ?’

Saeeda Bai did not say anything.

‘And why should I marry ?’ continued Maan, spreading his
arms wide on the bed and touching Saeeda Bai’s cheek with
his left hand. ‘Why ? Why ? Why ? Why ? Why ?’

‘Because your father can get me to sing at your wedding,’ said
Saeeda Bai with a smile. ‘And at the birth of your children.
And at their mundan ceremony. And at their marriages, of
course.’ She was silent for a few seconds. ‘But I won’t be
alive to do that,’ she went on. ‘In fact I sometimes wonder
what you see in an old woman like me.’

Maan became very indignant. He raised his voice and said,
‘Why do you say things like that? Do you do it just to get me
annoyed ? No one ever meant much to me until I met you.
That girl in Banaras whom I met twice under heavy escort is
less than nothing to me - and everyone thinks I must marry her
just because my father and mother say so.’

Saeeda Bai turned towards him and buried her face in

412.his arm. ‘But you must get married,’ she said. ‘You cannot
cause your parents so much pain.’

‘I don’t find her at all attractive,’ said Maan angrily.

‘That will merely take time,’ advised Saeeda Bai.

‘And I won’t be able to visit you after I’m married,’ said
Maan.

‘Oh ?’ said Saeeda Bai in such a way that the question, rather
than leading to a reply, implied the closure of the conversation.

6.4

AFTER a while they got up and moved to the other room.
Saeeda Bai called for the parakeet, of whom she had become
fond. Ishaq Khan brought in the cage, and a discussion ensued
about when he would learn to speak. Saeeda Bai seemed to
think that a couple of months would be sufficient, but Ishaq
was doubtful. ‘My grandfather had a parakeet who didn’t
speak for a whole year and then wouldn’t stop talking for the
rest of his life,’ he said.

‘I’ve never heard anything like that,’ said Saeeda Bai
dismissively. ‘Anyway, why are you holding that cage in such
a funny way ?’

‘Oh, it’s nothing really,’ said Ishaq, setting the cage down on a
table and rubbing his right wrist. ‘Just a pain in my wrist.’

In fact it was very painful and had become worse during the
previous few weeks.

‘You seem to play well enough,’ said Saeeda Bai, not very
sympathetically.

‘Saeeda Begum, what would I do if I didn’t play ?’

‘Oh, I don’t know,’ said Saeeda Bai, tickling the little
parakeet’s beak. ‘There’s probably nothing the matter with
your hand. You don’t have plans to go off for a wedding in the
family, do you ? Or to leave town until your famous explosion
at the radio station is forgotten ?’

If Ishaq was injured by this painful reference or these

413unjust suspicions, he did not show it. Saeeda Bai told him
to fetch Motu Chand, and the three of them soon began to
make music for Maan’s pleasure. Ishaq bit his lower lip from
time to time as his bow moved across the strings, but he said
nothing.

Saeeda Bai sat on a Persian rug with her harmonium in front
of her. Her head was covered with her sari, and she stroked the
double string of pearls hanging around her neck with a finger
of her left hand. Then, humming to herself, and moving her
left hand onto the bellows of the harmonium, she began to
play a few notes of Raag Pilu. After a little while, and as if
undecided about her mood and the kind of song she wished to
sing, she modulated to a few other raags.

‘What would you like to hear ?’ she asked Maan gently.

She had used a more intimate ‘you’ than she had ever used so
far - ‘turn’ instead of ‘aap’. Maan looked at her, smiling.

‘Well ?’ said Saeeda Bai, after a minute had gone by.

‘Well, Saeeda Begum ?’ said Maan.

‘What do you want to hear?’ Again she used turn instead of
aap and sent Maan’s world into a happy spin. A couplet he’d
heard somewhere came to his mind :

Among the lovers the Saki thus drew distinction’s line,
Handing the wine-cups one by one: ‘For you, Sir’;

‘Yours’ ; and ‘Thine’.

‘Oh, anything,’ said Maan, ‘Anything at all. Whatever you feel
is in your heart.’

Maan had still not plucked up the courage to use ‘turn’ or
plain ‘Saeeda’ with Saeeda Bai, except when he was making
love, when he hardly knew what he said. Perhaps, he thought,
she just used it absent-mindedly with me and will be offended
if I reciprocate.

But Saeeda Bai was inclined to take offence at something else.

‘I’m giving you the choice of music and you are returning the
problem to me,’ she said. ‘There are twenty different

414things in my heart. Can’t you hear me changing from raag
to raag ?’ Then, turning away from Maan, she said :

‘So, Motu, what is to be sung ?’

‘Whatever you wish, Saeeda Begum,’ said Motu Chand
happily.

‘You blockhead, I’m giving you an opportunity that most of
my audiences would kill themselves to receive and all you do
is smile back at me like a weak-brained baby, and say,
“Whatever you wish, Saeeda Begum.” What ^ghazal ?
Quickly. Or do you want to hear a thumri instead of a ghazal
?’

‘A ghazal will be best, Saeeda Bai,’ said Motu Chand, and
suggested ‘It’s just a heart, not brick and stone,’ by Ghalib.

At the end of the ghazal Saeeda Bai turned to Maan and said :
‘You must write a dedication in your book.’

‘What, in English ?’ asked Maan.

‘It amazes me,’ said Saeeda Bai, ‘to see the great poet Dagh
illiterate in his own language. We must do something about it.’

Til learn Urdu!’ said Maan enthusiastically.

Motu Chand and Ishaq Khan exchanged glances. Clearly they
thought that Maan was quite far gone in his fascination with
Saeeda Bai.

Saeeda Bai laughed. She asked Maan teasingly, ‘Will you
really ?’ Then she asked Ishaq to call the maidservant.

For some reason Saeeda Bai was annoyed with Bibbo today.
Bibbo seemed to know this, but to be unaffected by it. She
came in grinning, and this re-ignited Saeeda Bai’s annoyance.

‘You’re smiling just to annoy me,’ she said impatiently. ‘And
you forgot to tell the cook that the parakeet’s daal was not soft
enough yesterday - do you think he has the jaws of a tiger?
Stop grinning, you silly girl, and tell me what time is Abdur
Rasheed coming to give Tasneem her Arabic lesson ?’

Saeeda Bai felt safe enough with Maan to mention Tasneem’s
name in his presence.

415Bibbo assumed a satisfactorily apologetic expression and
said:

‘But he’s here already, as you know, Saeeda Bai.’

‘As I know ? As I know ?’ said Saeeda Bai with renewed
impatience. ‘I don’t know anything. And nor do you,’ she
added. ‘Tell him to come up at once.’

A few minutes later Bibbo was back, but alone.

‘Well ?’ said Saeeda Bai.

‘He won’t come,’ said Bibbo.

‘He won’t come? Does he know who pays him to give tuition
to Tasneem? Does he think his honour will be unsafe if he
comes upstairs to this room ? Or is it just that he is giving
himself airs because he is a university student ?’

‘I don’t know, Begum Sahiba,’ said Bibbo.

‘Then go, girl, and ask him why. It’s his income I want to
increase, not my own.’

Five minutes later Bibbo returned with a very broad grin on
her face and said, ‘He was very angry when I interrupted him
again. He was teaching Tasneem a complicated passage in the
Quran Sharif and told me that the divine word would have to
take precedence over his earthly income. But he will come
when the lesson is over.’

‘Actually, I’m not sure I want to learn Urdu,’ said Maan, who
was beginning to regret his sudden enthusiasm. He didn’t
really want to be saddled with a lot of hard work. And he
hadn’t expected the conversation to take such a practical turn
so suddenly. He was always making resolutions such as, ‘I
must learn polo’ (to Firoz, who enjoyed introducing his friends
to the tastes and joys of his own Nawabi lifestyle), or ‘I must

settle down’ (to Veena, who was the only one in the family
who was capable of ticking him off to some effect), or even ‘I
will not give swimming lessons to whales’ (which Pran
considered illjudged levity). But he made these resolutions
safe in the knowledge that their implementation was very far
away.

By now, however, the young Arabic teacher was standing
outside the door, quite hesitantly and a little disapprovingly.
He did adaab to the whole company, and waited to hear what
was required of him.

416’Rasheed, can you teach my young friend here Urdu ?’
asked Saeeda Bai, coming straight to the point.

The young man nodded a little reluctantly.

‘The understanding will be the same as with Tasneem,’ said
Saeeda Bai, who believed in getting practical matters sorted
out quickly.

‘That will be fine,’ said Rasheed. He spoke in a somewhat
clipped manner, as if he were still slightly piqued by the earlier
interruptions to his Arabic lesson. ‘And the name of the
gentleman ?’

‘Oh yes, I’m sorry,’ said Saeeda Bai. ‘This is Dagh Sahib,
whom the world so far knows only by the name of Maan
Kapoor. He is the son of Mahesh Kapoor, the Minister. And
his elder brother Pran teaches at the university, where you
study.’

The young man was frowning with a sort of inward
concentration. Then, fixing his sharp eyes on Maan he said, ‘It
will be an honour to teach the son of Mahesh Kapoor. I am
afraid I am a little late already for my next tuition. I hope that
when I come tomorrow we can fix up a suitable time for our
lesson. When do you tend to be free ?’

‘Oh, he tends to be free all the time,’ said Saeeda Bai with a
tender smile. ‘Time is not a problem with Dagh Sahib.’

6.5

ONE night, exhausted from marking examination papers, Pran
was sleeping soundly when he was awakened with a jolt. He
had been kicked. His wife had her arms around him, but she
was sleeping soundly still.

‘Savita, Savita - the baby kicked me!’ said Pran excitedly,
shaking his wife’s shoulder.

Savita opened a reluctant eye, felt Fran’s lanky and comforting
body near her, and smiled in the dark, before sinking back to
sleep.

‘Are you awake ?’ asked Pran.

417’Uh,’ said Savita. ‘Mm.’

‘But it really did!’ said Pran, unhappy with her lack of
response.

‘What did ?’ said Savita sleepily.

‘The baby.’

‘What baby ?’

‘Our baby.’

‘Our baby did what ?’

‘It kicked me.’

Savita sat up carefully and kissed Fran’s forehead, rather as if
he were a baby himself. ‘It couldn’t have. You’re dreaming.
Go back to sleep. And I’ll also go back to sleep. And so will
the baby.’

‘It did,’ said Pran, a little indignantly.

‘It couldn’t have,’ said Savita, lying down again. ‘I’d have felt
it.’

‘Well it did, that’s all. You probably don’t feel its kicks any
more. And you sleep very soundly. But it kicked me through
your belly, it definitely did, and it woke me up.’ He was very
insistent.

‘Oh, all right,’ said Savita. ‘Have it your way. I think he must
have known that you were having bad dreams, all about
chiasmus and Anna - whatever her name is.’

‘Anacoluthia.’

‘Tes, and 1 was “having good dreams and he didn’t want to
disturb me.’

‘Excellent baby,’ said Pran.

‘Our baby,’ said Savita. Pran got another hug.

They were silent for a while. Then, as Pran was drifting off to
sleep, Savita said :

‘He seems to have a lot of energy.’

‘Oh ?’ said Pran, half asleep.

Savita, now wide awake with her thoughts, was in no mood to
cut off this conversation.

‘Do you think he will turn out to be like Maan?’ she asked.

‘He?’

‘I sense he’s a boy,’ said Savita in a resolved sort of way.

‘In what sense like Maan ?’ asked Pran, suddenly remem-

418Bering that his mother had asked him to talk to his brother
about the direction of his life - and especially about Saeeda
Bai, whom his mother referred to only as ‘woh’ that woman.

‘Handsome - and a flirt ?’

‘Maybe,’ said Pran, his mind on other matters.

‘Or an intellectual like his father ?’

‘Oh, why not?’ said Pran, drawn back in. ‘He could do worse.
But without his asthma, I hope.’

‘Or do you think he’ll have the temper of my grandfather ?’

‘No, I don’t think it was an angry sort of kick. Just
informative. “Here I am; it’s two in the morning, and all’s
well.” Or perhaps he was, as you say, interrupting a
nightmare.’

‘Maybe he’ll be like Arun - very dashing and sophisticated.’

‘Sorry, Savita,’ said Pran. ‘If he turns out to be like your
brother, I’ll disown him. But he’ll have disowned us long

before that. In fact, if he’s like Arun, he’s probably thinking at
this very moment: “Awful service in this room; I must speak to
the manager so that I can get my nutrients on time. And they
should adjust the temperature of the amniotic fluid in this
indoor swimming pool, as they do in fivestar wombs. But what
can you expect in India ? Nothing works at all in this damned
country. What the natives need is a good solid dose of
discipline.” Perhaps that’s why he kicked me.’

Savita laughed. ‘You don’t know Arun well enough,’ was her
response.

Pran merely grunted.

‘Anyway, he might take after the women in this family,’ Savita
went on. ‘He might turn out to be like your mother or mine.’
The thought pleased her.

Pran frowned, but this latest flight of Savita’s fancy was too
taxing at two in the morning. ‘Do you want me to get you
something to drink ?’ he asked her.

‘No, mm, yes, a glass of water.’

Pran sat up, coughed a little, turned towards the bedside

419table, switched on the bedside lamp, and poured out a glass
of cool water from the thermos flask.

‘Here, darling,’ he said, looking at her with slightly rueful
affection. How beautiful she looked now, and how wonderful

it would be to make love with her.

‘You don’t sound too good, Pran,’ said Savita.

Pran smiled, and passed his hand across her forehead. ‘I’m
fine.’

‘I worry about you.’

‘I don’t,’ Pran lied.

‘You don’t get enough fresh air, and you use your lungs too
much. I wish you were a writer, not a lecturer.’ Savita drank
the water slowly, savouring its coolness in the warm night.

‘Thanks,’ said Pran. ‘But you don’t get enough exercise either.
You should walk around a bit, even during your pregnancy.’

‘I know,’ said Savita, yawning now. ‘I’ve been reading the
book my mother gave me.’

‘All right, goodnight, darling. Give me the glass.’

He switched off the light and lay in the dark, his eyes still
open. I never expected to be as happy as this, he told himself.
I’m asking myself if I’m happy, and it hasn’t made me cease to
be so. But how long will this last ? It isn’t just me *but my
wiîe an., Mahesh Kapoor.

‘Yes, yes, yes! Get to the point. They realize no doubt that our
son is too good for their daughter and want to call the whole
thing off.’

Sometimes wisdom lies in not taking an ironical remark as
ironical. Mrs Mahesh Kapoor said: ‘No, quite the opposite.
They want to fix the date as quickly as possible - and I don’t
know what to reply. If you read between the lines it seems that
they even have some idea about well, about “that”. Why else
would they be so concerned ?’

‘Uff-oh!’ said Mahesh Kapoor impatiently. ‘Do I have to hear
about this from everyone ? In the Assembly canteen, in my
own office, everywhere I hear about Maan and his idiocy !
This morning two or three people brought it up. Is there
nothing more important in the world to talk about ?’

But Mrs Mahesh Kapoor persevered.

‘It is very important for our family,’ she said. ‘How can we
hold our heads up in front of people if this goes on ? And it is
not good for Maan either to spend all his time and money like
this. He was supposed to come here on business, and he has
done nothing in that line. Please speak to him.’

‘You speak to him,’ said Mahesh Kapoor brutally. ‘You have
spoilt him all his life.’

Mrs Mahesh Kapoor was silent, but a tear trickled down her
cheek. Then she rallied and said : ‘Is it good for your public
image either ? A son who does nothing but spend his time with
that kind of person ? The rest of the time he lies down on his
bed and stares up at the fan. He

449should do something else, something serious. I don’t have
the heart to say anything to him. After all, what can a mother
say ?’

‘All right, all right, all right,’ said Mahesh Kapoor, and closed
his eyes.

He reflected that the cloth business in Banaras was, under the
care of a competent assistant, doing better in Maan’s absence
than it had been doing when he was there. What then was to be
done with Maan ?

At about eight o’clock that evening he was about to get into
the car to visit Baitar House when he told the driver to wait.
Then he sent a servant to see if Maan was in the house. When
the servant told him that he was sleeping, Mahesh Kapoor said
:

‘Wake up the good-for-nothing fellow, and tell him to dress
and come down at once. We are going to visit the Nawab
Sahib of Baitar.’

Maan came down looking none too happy. Earlier in the day
he had been exercising hard on the wooden horse, and now he
was looking forward to visiting Saeeda Bai and exercising his
wit, among other things.

‘Baoji ?’ he said enquiringly.

‘Get into the car. We’re going to Baitar House.’

‘Do you want me to come along?’ asked Maan.

‘Yes.’

‘All right, then.’ Maan got into the car. There was, he realized,
no way to avoid being kidnapped.

‘I am assuming you have nothing better to do,’ said his father.

‘No Not really.’

‘Then you should get used to adult company again,’ said his
father sternly.

As it happened, he also enjoyed Maan’s cheerfulness, and
thought it would be good to take him along for moral support
when he went to apologize to his old friend the Nawab Sahib.
But Maan was less than cheerful at the moment. He was
thinking of Saeeda Bai. She would be expecting him and he
would not even be able to send her a message to say that he
could not come.

4506.15

AS they entered the grounds of Baitar House, however, he
cheered up a little at the thought that he might meet Firoz. At
polo practice Firoz had not mentioned that he would be going
out for dinner.

They were asked to sit in the lobby for a few minutes.

The old servant said that the Nawab Sahib was in the

P. library, and that he would be informed of the Minister’s

* arrival. After ten minutes or so, Mahesh Kapoor got up

from the old leather sofa and started walking up and

down. He was tired of twiddling his thumbs and staring at

photographs of white men with dead tigers at their feet.

A few minutes more, and his patience was at an end. He told
Maan to come with him, and walked through the highceilinged rooms and somewhat ill-lit corridors towards the
library. Ghulam Rusool made a few ineffectual attempts at
dissuasion, but to no effect. Murtaza Ali, who was hanging
around near the library, was brushed aside as well. The
Minister of Revenue with his son in tow strode up to the
library door and flung it open.

Brilliant light blinded him for a moment. Not only the
mellower reading lights but the great chandelier in the middle
of the library had been lit. And at the large round table below with papers spread out around them and even a couple of buff
leather-bound law-books lying open before them - sat three
other sets of fathers and sons : The Nawab Sahib of Baitar and

Firoz; the Raja and Rajkumar of Marh; and two Bony
Bespectacled Bannerji Barristers (as that famous family of
lawyers was known in Brahmpur).

It would be difficult to say who was most embarrassed by this
sudden intrusion.

The crass Marh snarled : ‘Speak of the Devil.’

Firoz, though he found the situation uncomfortable, was
pleased to see Maan and went up to him immediately to shake
his hand. Maan put his left arm around his friend’s shoulder
and said: ‘Don’t shake my right hand - you’ve crippled it
already.’

45 !The Rajkumar of Marh, who was interested in young men
more than in the jargon of the Zamindari Bill, looked at the
handsome pair with a little more than approval.

The elder Bannerji (‘P.N.’) glanced quickly at his son (‘S.N.’)
as if to say, ‘I told you we should have had the conference in
our chambers.’

The Nawab Sahib felt that he had been caught redhanded,
plotting against Mahesh Kapoor’s bill with a man whom he
would normally have shunned.

And Mahesh Kapoor realized instantly that he was the least
welcome intruder imaginable at this working conference - for
it was he who was the enemy, the expropriator, the
government, the fount of injustice, the other side.

It was, however, Mahesh Kapoor who broke the ice among the
elder circle by going up to the Nawab Sahib and taking his
hand. He did not say anything, but slowly nodded his head. No
words of sympathy or apology were needed. The Nawab Sahib
knew immediately that his friend would have done anything in
his power to help him when Baitar House was under siege but that he had been ignorant of the crisis.

The Raja of Marh broke the silence with a laugh:

‘So you have come to spy on us! We are flattered. No mere
minion but the Minister himself.’

Mahesh Kapoor said :

‘Since I was not blinded by the vision of your gold numberplates outside, I could hardly have known you were here.
Presumably, you came by rickshaw.’

‘I will have to count my number-plates before I leave,’
continued the Raja of Marh.

‘If you need any help, let me send my son with you. He can
count till two,’ said Mahesh Kapoor.

The Raja of Marh had become red in the face. ‘Was this
planned?’ he demanded of the Nawab Sahib. He was thinking
that this could well be a plot by the Muslims and their
sympathizers to humiliate him.

The Nawab Sahib found his voice. ‘No, Your Highness, it was
not. And I apologize to all of you, especially to you,

452.Mr Bannerji - I should not have insisted that we meet
here.’

Since common interest in the impending litigation had thrown
him together with the Raja of Marh anyway, the Nawab Sahib
had hoped that by inviting the Raja to his own house he might
get the chance to talk to him a little about the Shiva Temple in
Chowk - or at least to create the possibility of a later talk. The
communal situation * j among the Hindus and Muslims in
Brahmpur was so troubling that the Nawab had swallowed his
gorge and a little of his pride in order to help sort things out.
The move had now backfired.

The elder of the Bony Bespectacleds, appalled by what had
gone before, now said in a rather finicky voice: ‘Well, I think
we have already discussed the main lines of the matter, and
can adjourn for the moment. I will inform my father by letter
of what has been said by all sides, and I hope I can persuade
him to appear for us in this matter if and when it is necessary.’

He was referring to the great G.N. Bannerji, a lawyer of
legendary fame, acumen, and rapacity. If, as was now almost
inevitable, the amended bill went through in the Upper House,
obtained the President of India’s signature, and became law, it
would certainly be challenged in the Brahmpur High Court. If
G.N. Bannerji could be persuaded to appear on behalf of the
landlords, it would considerably improve their chances of
having the act declared unconstitutional, and therefore null and
void.

The Bannerjis took their leave. The younger Bannerji, though
no older than Firoz, had a flourishing practice already. He was
intelligent, worked hard, had cases shovelled his way by his
family’s old clients, and thought of Firoz as rather too languid
for life at the Bar. Firoz admired his intelligence but thought
him a prig, a little along the lines of his finicky father. His
grandfather, the great G.N. Bannerji, however, was not a prig.
Though he was in his seventies, he was as energetic erect on
his feet in court as erect off his feet in bed. The huge, some
would say unscrupulous, fees he insisted on before he
accepted a

453case went to support a scattered harem of women ; but he
still succeeded in living beyond his means.

The Rajkumar of Marh was a basically decent and not badlooking but somewhat weak young man who was bullied by
his father. Firoz loathed the crude, Muslimbaiting Raja : ‘black
as coal with his diamond buttons and ear-tops’. His sense of
family honour made him keep his distance from the Rajkumar
as well. Not so Maan, who was inclined to like people unless
they made themselves unlikable. The Rajkumar, quite attracted
by Maan, and discovering that he was at a loose end these
days, suggested a few things that they could do together, and
Maan agreed to meet him later in the week.

Meanwhile the Raja of Marh, the Nawab Sahib, and Mahesh
Kapoor were standing by the table in the full light of the
chandelier. Mahesh Kapoor’s eyes fell on the papers spread
out on the table, but then, remembering the Raja’s earlier jeer,
he quickly turned his gaze away.

‘No, no, be our guest, Minister Sahib,’ sneered the Raja of
Marh. ‘Read away. And in exchange, tell me when exactly you
plan to vest the ownership of our lands in your own pocket.’

‘My own pocket ?’

A silverfish scurried across the table. The Raja crushed it with
his thumb.

‘I meant, of course, the Revenue Department of the great state
of Purva Pradesh.’

‘In due course.’

‘Now you are talking like your dear friend Agarwal in the
Assembly.’

Mahesh Kapoor did not respond. The Nawab Sahib said :
‘Should we move into the drawing room ?’

The Raja of Marh made no attempt to move. He said, almost
equally to the Nawab Sahib and the Minister of Revenue : ‘I
asked you that question merely from altruistic motives. I am
supporting the other zamindars simply because I do not care
for the attitude of the government - or political insects like
you. I myself have nothing to lose. My lands are protected
from your laws.’

454’Oh?’ said Mahesh Kapoor. ‘One law for men and another
for monkeys ?’

‘If you still call yourself a Hindu,’ said the Raja of Marh, ‘you
may recall that it was the army of monkeys that defeated the

army of demons.’

‘And what miracle do you expect this time ?’ Mahesh Kapoor
could not resist asking.

‘Article 362. of the Constitution,’ said the Raja of Marh,
gleefully spitting out a number larger than two. ‘These are our
private lands, Minister Sahib, our own private lands, and by
the covenants of merger that we rulers made when we agreed
to join your India, the law cannot loot them and the courts
cannot touch them.’

It was well known that the Raja of Marh had gone drunk and
babbling to the dour Home Minister of India, Sardar Patel, to
sign the Instrument of Accession by which he made over his
state to the Indian Union, and had even smudged his signature
with his tears - thus creating a unique historical document.

‘We will see,’ said Mahesh Kapoor. ‘We will see. No doubt
G.N. Bannerji will defend Your Highness in the future as ably
as he has defended your lowness in the past.’

Whatever story lay behind this taunt, it had a signal effect.

The Raja of Marh made a sudden, growling, vicious lunge
towards Mahesh Kapoor. Luckily he stumbled over a chair,
and fell towards his left onto the table. Winded, he raised his
face from among the law-books and scattered papers. But a
page of a law-book had got Tom.

For a second, staring at the Tom page, the Raja of Marh
looked dazed, as if he was uncertain where he was. Firoz,

taking advantage of his disorientation, quickly went up to him,
and with an assured arm led him towards the drawing room. It
was all over in a few seconds. The Rajkumar followed his
father.

The Nawab Sahib looked towards Mahesh Kapoor, and raised
one hand slightly, as if to say, ‘Let things be.’ Mahesh Kapoor
said, ‘I am sorry, very sorry’ ; but both he and his friend knew
that he was referring less to the

455immediate incident than to his delay in coming to Baitar
House.

After a while, he said to his son: ‘Come, Maan, let’s go.’ On
the way out, they noticed the Raja’s long black Lancia with its
solid gold ingot-like licence-plates stamped ‘MARH i’ lurking
in the drive.

In the car back to Prem Nivas, each was lost in his own
thoughts. Mahesh Kapoor was thinking that, despite his
explosive timing, he was glad that he had not waited still
longer to reassure his friend. He could sense how affected the
Nawab Sahib had been when he had taken his hand.

Mahesh Kapoor expected that the Nawab Sahib would call
him up the next day to apologize for what had happened, but
not offer any substantial explanations. The whole business was
very uncomfortable: there was a strange, unresolved air to
events. And it was disturbing that a coalition - however
volatile - of former enemies was coming into being out of selfinterest or self-preservation against his long-nurtured
legislation. He would very much have liked to know what
legal weaknesses, if any, the lawyers had found in his bill.

Maan was thinking how glad he was that he had met his friend
again. He had told Firoz that he would probably be stuck with
his father the whole evening, and Firoz had promised to send a
message to Saeeda Bai - and if necessary to take it there
personally - to inform her that Dagh Sahib had been detained.

6.16

‘NO; be careful; think.’

The voice was slightly mocking, but not without concern. It
appeared to care that the task should be done well - that the
neatly lined page should not become a record of shame and
shapelessness. In a way, it appeared to care about what
happened to Maan as well. Maan frowned, then wrote the
character ‘meem’ again. It looked to him like a curved
spermatozoon.

456r

‘Your mind isn’t on the tip of your nib,’ said Rasheed. ‘If you
want to make use of my time - and I am here at your service why not concentrate on what you’re doing ?’

‘Yes, yes, all right, all right,’ said Maan shortly, sounding for a
second remarkably like his father. He tried again. The Urdu
alphabet, he felt, was difficult, multiform, fussy, elusive,
unlike either the solid Hindi or the solid English script.

v ‘I can’t do this. It looks beautiful on the printed page, *but to
write it -‘

‘Try again. Don’t be impatient.’ Rasheed took the bamboo pen
from his hand, dipped it in the inkwell, and wrote a perfect,
dark blue ‘meem’. He then wrote another below it: the letters
were identical, as two letters rarely are.

‘What does it matter, anyway?’ asked Maan, looking up from
the sloping desk at which he was sitting, crosslegged, on the
floor. ‘I want to read Urdu and to write it, not to practise
calligraphy. Do I have to do this?’ He reflected that he was
asking for permission as he used to when he was a child.
Rasheed was no older than he was, but had taken complete
control of him in his role as a teacher.

‘Well, you have put yourself in my hands, and I don’t want
you to start on shaky foundations. So what would you like to
read now ?’ Rasheed inquired with a slight smile, hoping that
Maan’s answer would not be the predictable one once more.

‘Ghazals,’ said Maan unhesitatingly. ‘Mir, Ghalib, Dagh.

‘Yes, well -‘ Rasheed said nothing for a while. There was
tension in his eyes at the thought of having to teach ghazals to
Maan shortly before going over passages of the Holy Book
with Tasneem.

‘So what do you say?’ said Maan. ‘Why don’t we start today
?’

‘That would be like teaching a baby to run the marathon,’
Rasheed responded after a few seconds, having found an
analogy ridiculous enough to suit his dismay.

457’Eventually, of course, you will be able to. But for now,
just try that meem again.’

Maan put the pen down and stood up. He knew that Saeeda
Bai was paying Rasheed, and he sensed that Rasheed needed
the money. He had nothing against his teacher; in a way he
liked his conscientiousness. But he rebelled against his attempt
to impose a new infancy on him. What Rasheed was pointing
out to him was the first step on an endless and intolerably
tedious road; at this rate it would be years before he would be
able to read even those ghazals that he knew by heart. And
decades before he could pen the love-letters he yearned to
write. Yet Saeeda Bai had made a compulsory half-hour lesson
a day with Rasheed ‘the little bitter foretaste’ that would whet
his appetite for her company.

The whole thing was so cruelly erratic, however, thought
Maan. Sometimes she would see him, sometimes not, just as it
suited her. He had no sense of what to expect, and it ruined his
concentration. And so here he had to sit in a cool room on the
ground floor of his beloved’s house with his back hunched
over a pad with sixty aliphs and forty zaals and twenty
misshapen meems, while occasionally a few magical notes
from the harmonium, a phrase from the sarangi, a strain of a
thumri floated down the inner balcony and filtered through the
door to frustrate both his lesson and him.

Maan never enjoyed being entirely by himself at the best of
times, but these evenings, when his lesson was over, if word
came through Bibbo or Ishaq that Saeeda Bai preferred to be
alone, he felt crazy with unhappiness and frustration. Then, if

Firoz and Imtiaz were not at home, and if family life appeared,
as it usually did, unbearably bland and tense and pointless,
Maan would fall in with his latest acquaintances, the Rajkumar
of Marh and his set, and lose his sorrows and his money in
gambling and drink.

‘Look, if you aren’t in the mood for a lesson today….’
Rasheed’s voice was kinder than Maan had expected, though
there was rather a sharp expression on his wolflike face.

458’No, no, that’s fine. Let’s go on. It’s just a question of selfcontrol.’ Maan sat down again.

‘Indeed it is,’ said Rasheed, reverting to his former tone of
voice. Self-control, it struck him, was what Maan needed even
more than perfect meems. ‘Why have you got yourself trapped
in a place like this?’ he wanted to ask Maan. ‘Isn’t it pathetic
that you should be sacrificing your dignity for a person of
Saeeda Begum’s profession ?’

Perhaps all this was present in his three crisp words. At 1 any
rate, Maan suddenly felt like confiding in him.

‘You see, it’s like this -‘ began Maan. ‘I have a weak will, and
when I fall into bad company -‘ He stopped. What on earth
was he saying? And how would Rasheed know what he was
talking about ? And why, even if he did, should he care ?

But Rasheed appeared to understand. ‘When I was younger,’
he said, ‘I - who now consider myself truly sober - would
spend my time beating people up. My grandfather used to do
so in our village, and he was a well-respected man, so I
thought that beating people up was what made people look up

to him. There were about five or six of us, and we would egg
each other on. We’d just go up to some schoolfellow, who
might be wandering innocently along, and slap him hard
across the face. What I would never have dared to do alone, I
did without any hesitation in company. But, well, I don’t any
more. I’ve learned to follow another voice, to be alone and to
understand things - maybe to be alone and to be
misunderstood.’

To Maan this sounded like the advice of a good angel; or
perhaps a risen one. In his imagination’s eye he saw the
Rajkumar and Rasheed struggling for, his soul. One was
coaxing him towards hell with five poker cards, one beating
him towards paradise with a quill. He botched another meem
before asking :

‘And is your grandfather still alive ?’

‘Oh yes,’ said Rasheed, frowning. ‘He sits on a cot in the
shade and reads the Quran Sharif all day, and chases the
village children away when they disturb him. And soon

459he will try to chase the officers of the law away too,
because he doesn’t like your father’s plans.’

‘So you’re zamindars ?’ Maan was surprised.

Rasheed thought this over before saying: ‘My grandfather was,
before he divided his wealth among his sons. And so is my
father and so is my, well, my uncle. As for myself -‘ He
paused, appeared to look over Maan’s page, then continued,
without finishing his previous sentence, ‘Well, who am I to set
myself up in judgment in these matters ? They are very happy,

naturally, to keep things as they are. But I have lived in the
village almost all my life, and I have seen the whole system. I
know how it works. The zamindars - and my family is not so
extraordinary as to be an exception to this - the zamindars do
nothing but make their living from the misery of others; and
they try to force their sons into the same ugly mould as
themselves.’ Here Rasheed paused, and the area around the
corners of his mouth tightened. ‘If their sons want to do
anything else, they make life miserable for them too,’ he
continued. ‘They talk a great deal about family honour, but
they have no sense of honour except to gratify the promises of
pleasure they have made to themselves.’

He was silent for a second, as if hesitating; then went on:

‘Some of the most respected of landlords do not even keep
their word, they are so petty. You might find this hard to
believe but I was virtually offered a job here in Brahmpur as
the curator of the library of one such great man, but when I got
to the grand house I was told - well, anyway, all this is
irrelevant. The main fact is that the system of landlords isn’t
good for the villagers, it isn’t good for the countryside as a
whole, it isn’t good for the country, and until it goes….’ The
sentence remained unfinished. Rasheed was pressing his
fingertips to his forehead, as if he was in pain.

This was a far cry from meem, but Maan listened with
sympathy to the young tutor, who appeared to speak out of
some terrible pressure, not merely of circumstances.

460Only a few minutes earlier he had been counselling care,
concentration, and moderation for Maan.

There was a knock on the door, and Rasheed quickly
straightened up. Ishaq Khan and Motu Chand entered.

‘Our apologies, Kapoor Sahib.’

‘No, no, you’re quite right to enter,’ said Maan. ‘The time for
my lesson is over, and I’m depriving Begum Sahiba’s sister of
her Arabic.’ He got up. ‘Well, I’ll see you v tomorrow, and my
meems will be matchless,’ he promised ^Rasheed
impetuously. ‘Well ?’ he nodded genially at the musicians, ‘Is
it life or death ?’

But from Motu Chand’s downcast looks he anticipated Ishaq
Khan’s words.

‘Kapoor Sahib, I fear that this evening - I mean the Begum
Sahiba asked me to inform you ‘

‘Yes, yes,’ said Maan, angry and hurt. ‘Good. My deep
respects to the Begum Sahiba. Till tomorrow, then.’

‘It is just that she is indisposed.’ Ishaq disliked lying and was
bad at it.

‘Yes,’ said Maan, who would have been very much more
concerned if he had believed in her indisposition. ‘I trust that
she will recover rapidly.’ At the door he turned and added: ‘If I
thought it would do any good, I would prescribe her a string of
meems, one to be taken every hour and several before she
retires.’

Motu Chand looked at Ishaq for a clue, but Ishaq’s face
reflected his own perplexity.

‘It’s no more than she has prescribed for me,’ said Maan.
‘And, as you can see, I am flourishing as a result. My soul, at
any rate, has avoided indisposition as successfully as she has
been avoiding me.’

6.17

RASHEED was just picking up his books when Ishaq Khan,
who was still standing by the door, blurted out :

‘And Tasneem is indisposed as well.’

Motu Chand glanced at his friend. Rasheed’s back was

461towards them, but it had stiffened. He had heard Ishaq
Khan’s excuse to Maan; it had not increased his respect for the
sarangi player that he had acted in this demeaning manner as
an emissary for Saeeda Bai. Was he now acting as an emissary
for Tasneem as well ?

‘What gives you that understanding ?’ he asked, turning
around slowly.

Ishaq Khan coloured at the patent disbelief in the teacher’s
voice.

‘Well, whatever state she is in now, she will be indisposed
after her lesson with you,’ he replied challengingly. And,
indeed, it was true. Tasneem was often in tears after her
lessons with Rasheed.

‘She has a tendency to tears,’ said Rasheed, sounding more
harsh than he intended. ‘But she is not unintelligent and is
making good progress. If there are any problems with my
teaching, her guardian can inform me in person or in writing.’

‘Can’t you be a little less rigorous with her, Master Sahib ?’
said Ishaq hotly. ‘She is a delicate girl. She is not training to
become a mullah, you know. Or a haafiz.’

And yet, tears or no tears, reflected Ishaq painfully, Tasneem
was spending so much of her spare time on Arabic these days
that she had very little left for anyone e’ise. Her Wessons
appeared to have recnrectea Viet even irom romantic novels.
Did he really wish her young teacher to start behaving gently
towards her ?

Rasheed had gathered up his papers and books. He now spoke
almost to himself. ‘I am no more rigorous with her than I am
with’ - he had been about to say ‘myself ‘with anyone else.
One’s emotions are largely a matter of self-control. Nothing is
painless,’ he added a little bitterly.

Ishaq’s eyes flashed. Motu Chand placed a restraining hand on
his shoulder.

‘And anyway,’ continued Rasheed, ‘Tasneem has a tendency
to indolence.’

‘She appears to have lots of tendencies, Master Sahib.’

Rasheed frowned. ‘And this is exacerbated by that halfwitted
parakeet which she keeps interrupting her work to

462•*#•• *“•*

feed or indulge. It is no pleasure to hear fragments of the Book
of God being mangled in the beak of a blasphemous bird.’

Ishaq was too dumbstruck to say anything. Rasheed walked
past him and out of the room.

‘What made you provoke him like that, Ishaq Bhai ?’ said
Motu Chand after a few seconds.

‘Provoke him ? Why, he provoked me. His last remark -‘

‘He couldn’t have known that you had given her the parakeet.’

‘Why, everyone knows.’

‘He probably doesn’t. He doesn’t interest himself in that kind
of thing, our upright Rasheed. What got into you? Why are
you provoking everyone these days ?’

The reference to Ustad Majeed Khan was not lost on Ishaq,
but the subject was one he could hardly bear to think of. He
said :

‘So that owl book provoked you, did it? Have you tried any of
its recipes? How many women has it lured into your power,
Motu ? And what does your wife have to say about your newfound prowess ?’

‘You know what I mean,’ said Motu Chand, undeflected.
‘Listen, Ishaq, there’s nothing to be gained by putting people’s
backs up. Just now -‘

‘It’s these wretched hands of mine,’ cried Ishaq, holding them
up and looking at them as if he hated them. ‘These wretched
hands. For the last hour upstairs it has been torture.’

‘But you were playing so well -‘

‘What will happen to me? To my younger brothers? I can’t get
employment on the basis of my brilliant wit. And even my
brother-in-law won’t be able to come to Brahmpur to help us
now. How can I show my face at the radio station, let alone
ask for a transfer for him ?’

‘It’s bound to get better, Ishaq Bhai. Don’t distress yourself
like this. I’ll help you -‘

This was of course impossible. Motu Chand had four small
children.

‘Even music means agony to me now,’ said Ishaq Khan

463to himself, shaking his head. ‘Even music. I cannot bear to
hear it even when I am not on duty. This hand follows the tune
by itself, and it seizes up with pain. If my father had been
alive, what would he have said if he had heard me speaking
like this ?’

6.18

‘THE BEGUM SAHIBA was very explicit,’ said the
watchman. ‘She is not seeing anyone this evening.’

‘Why ?’ demanded Maan. ‘Why ?’

‘I do not know,’ said the watchman.

‘Please find out,’ said Maan, slipping a two-rupee note into the
man’s hand.

The watchman took the note and said : ‘She is not well.’

‘But you knew that before,’ said Maan, a bit aggrieved. ‘That
means I must go and see her. She will be wanting to see me.’

‘No,’ said the watchman, standing before the gate. ‘She will
not be wanting to see you.’

This struck Maan as distinctly unfriendly. ‘Now look,’ he said,
‘you have to let me in.’ He tried to shoulder his way past the
watchman, but the watchman resisted, and there was a scuffle.

Voices were heard from inside, and Bibbo emerged. When she
saw what was happening, her hand flew to her mouth. Then
she gasped out : Thool Singh - stop it ! Dagh Sahib, please please - what will Begum Sahiba say ?’

This thought brought Maan to his senses, and he brushed down
his kurta, looking rather shamefaced. Neither he nor the
watchman was injured. The watchman continued to look
entirely matter-of-fact about the whole incident.

‘Bibbo, is she very ill ?’ asked Maan in vicarious pain.

‘Ill ?’ said Bibbo. ‘Who’s ill ?’

‘Saeeda Bai, of course.’

‘She’s not in the least ill,’ said Bibbo, laughing. Then, as she
caught the watchman’s eye, she added : ‘At least not

464*•*

until half an hour ago, when she had a sharp pain around her
heart. She can’t see you - or anyone.’

‘Who’s with her ?’ demanded Maan.

‘No one, that is, well, as I’ve just said - no one.’

‘Someone is with her,’ said Maan fiercely, with a sharp stab of
jealousy.

‘Dagh Sahib,’ said Bibbo, not without sympathy, ‘it is not like
you to be like this.’

‘Like what?’ said Maan.

‘Jealous. Begum Sahiba has her old admirers - she cannot cast
them off. This house depends on their generosity.’

‘Is she angry with me ?’ asked Maan.

‘Angry ? Why ?’ asked Bibbo blankly.

‘Because I didn’t come that day as I had promised,’ said
Maan. ‘I tried - I just couldn’t get away.’

‘I don’t think she was angry with you,’ said Bibbo. ‘But she
was certainly angry with your messenger.’

‘With Firoz ?’ said Maan, astonished.

‘Yes, with the Nawabzada.’

‘Did he deliver a note ?’ asked Maan. He reflected with a little
envy that Firoz, who could read and write Urdu, could thereby
communicate in writing with Saeeda Bai.

‘I think so,’ said Bibbo, a little vaguely.

‘And why was she angry ?’ asked Maan.

‘I don’t know,’ said Bibbo with a light laugh. ‘I must go in
now.’ And she left Maan standing on the pavement looking
very agitated.

Saeeda Bai had in fact been greatly displeased to see Firoz,
and was annoyed at Maan for having sent him. Yet, when she
received Maan’s message that he could not come on the
appointed evening, she could not help feeling disappointed and
sad. And this fact too annoyed her. She could not afford to get
emotionally attached to this light-hearted, light-headed, and
probably light-footed young man. She had a profession to keep
up, and he was definitely in the nature of a distraction,
however pleasant. And so she began to realize that it might be
a good thing if he stayed away for a while. Since she was
entertaining a patron this

465evening, she had instructed the watchman to keep
everyone else - and particularly Maan - away.

When Bibbo later reported to her what had happened, Saeeda
Bai’s reaction was irritation at what she saw as Maan’s
interference in her professional life: he had no claim on her
time or what she did with it. But later still, talking to the
parakeet, she said, ‘Dagh Sahib, Dagh Sahib’ quite a number

of times, her expression ranging from sexual passion to
flirtatiousness to tenderness to indifference to irritation to
anger. The parakeet was receiving a more elaborate education
in the ways of the world than most of his fellows.

Maan had wandered off, wondering what to do with his time,
incapable of getting Saeeda Bai out of his mind, but craving
some, any, activity that could distract him at least for a
moment. He remembered that he’d said he would drop by to
see the Rajkumar of Marh, and so he made his way to the
lodgings not far from the university that the Rajkumar had
taken with six or seven other students, four of whom were still
in Brahmpur at the beginning of the summer vacation. These
students - two the scions of other petty princedoms, and one
the son of a large zamindar were not short of money. Most of
them got a couple of hundred rupees a month to spend as they
liked. This would have been just about equal to Fran’s entire
salary, and these students looked upon their unwealthy
lecturers with easy contempt.

The Rajkumar and his friends ate together, played cards
together, and shared each other’s company a good deal. Each
of them spent fifteen rupees a month on mess fees (they had
their own cook) and another twenty rupees a month on what
they called ‘girl fees’. These went to support a very beautiful
nineteen-year-old dancing girl who lived with her mother in a
street not far from the university. Rupvati would entertain the
friends quite often, and one of them would stay behind
afterwards. This way each of them got a turn once every two
weeks by rotation.

466On the other nights, Rupvati was free to entertain any of
them or to take a night off, but the understanding was that she
would have no other clients. The mother would greet the boys
very affectionately; she was very pleased to see them, and

often told them that she did not know what she and her
daughter would have done if it hadn’t been for their kindness.

Within half an hour of meeting the Rajkumar of Marh and
drinking a fair amount of whisky, Maan had spilt out all his
troubles on his shoulder. The Rajkumar mentioned Rupvati,
and suggested that they visit her. Maan cheered up slightly at
this and, taking the bottle with them, they began to walk in the
direction of her house. But the Rajkumar suddenly
remembered that this was one of her nights off, and that they
would not be entirely welcome there.

‘I know what we’ll do. We’ll visit Tarbuz ka Bazaar instead,’
said the Rajkumar, hailing a tonga and pulling Maan onto it.
Maan was in no mood to resist this suggestion.

But when the Rajkumar, who had placed a friendly hand on his
thigh, moved it significantly upwards, he shook it away with a
laugh.

The Rajkumar did not take this rejection at all amiss, and in a
couple of minutes, with the bottle passing between them, they
were talking as easily as before.

‘This is a great risk for me,’ said the Rajkumar, ‘but because
of our great friendship I am doing it.’

Maan began to laugh. ‘Don’t do it again,’ he said. ‘I feel
ticklish.’

Now it was the Rajkumar’s turn to laugh. ‘I don’t mean that,’
he said. ‘I mean that taking you to Tarbuz ka Bazaar is a risk

for me.’ ,,

‘Oh, how ?’ said Maan.

‘Because “any student who is seen in an undesirable place
shall be liable to immediate expulsion.” ‘

The Rajkumar was quoting from the curious and detailed rules
of conduct promulgated for the students of Brahmpur
University. This particular rule sounded so

467vague and yet at the same time so delightfully draconian
that the Rajkumar and his friends had learned it by heart and
used to chant it in chorus to the lilt of the Gayatri Mantra
whenever they went out to gamble or drink or whore.

6.19

THEY soon got to Old Brahmpur, and wound through the
narrow streets towards Tarbuz ka Bazaar. Maan was beginning
to have second thoughts.

‘Why not some other night - ?’ he began.

‘Oh, they serve very good biryani there,’ said the Rajkumar.

‘Where ?’

‘At Tahmina Bai’s. I’ve been there once or twice when it’s
been a non-Rupvati day.’

Maan’s head sank on his chest and he went off to sleep. When
they got to Tarbuz ka Bazaar, the Rajkumar woke him up.

‘From here we’ll have to walk.’

‘Not far ?’

‘No - not far. Tahmina Bai’s place is just around the corner.^

They dismounted, paid the tonga-wallah, and walked hand in
hand into a side alley. The Rajkumar then walked up a flight of
narrow and steep stairs, pulling a tipsy Maan behind him.

But when they got to the top of the stairs they heard a
confused noise, and when they had walked a few steps along
the corridor they were faced with a curious scene.

The plump, pretty, dreamy-eyed Tahmina Bai was giggling in
delight as an opium-eyed, vacant-faced, redtongued, barrelbodied, middle-aged man - an income tax clerk - was beating
on the tabla and singing an obscene song in a thin voice. Two
scruffy lower division clerks were lounging around, one of
them with his head in her lap. They were trying to sing along.

468The Rajkumar and Maan were about to beat a retreat, when
the madam of the establishment saw them and bustled quickly
towards them along the corridor. She knew who the Rajkumar

was, and hastened to reassure him that the others would be
cleared out in a couple of minutes.

The two loitered around a paan shop for a few minutes, then
went back upstairs. Tahmina Bai, alone, and with a beatific
smile on her face, was ready to entertain them.

First she sang a thumri, then - realizing that time was * getting
on - she fell into a sulk.

‘Oh, do sing,’ said the Rajkumar, prodding Maan to placate
Tahmina Bai as well.

‘Ye-es -‘ said Maan.

‘No, I won’t, you don’t appreciate my voice.’ She looked
downwards and pouted.

‘Well,’ said the Rajkumar, ‘at least grace us with some poetry.’

This sent Tahmina Bai into gales of laughter. Her pretty little
jowls shook, and she snorted with delight. The Rajkumar was
mystified. After another swig from his bottle, he looked at her
in wonderment.

‘Oh, it’s too - ah, ah - grace us with some - hah, hah poetry!’

Tahmina Bai was no longer in a sulk but in an ungovernable fit
of laughter. She squealed and squealed and held her sides and

gasped, the tears running down her face.

When she was finally capable of speech, she told them a joke.

‘The poet Akbar Allahabadi was in Banaras when he was
lured by some friends into a street just like ours. He had drunk
quite a lot - just like you - so he leaned against a wall to
urinate. And then - what happened ? - a courtesan, leaning out
from a window above, recognized him from one of his poetry
recitals and - and she said -‘ Tahmina Bai giggled, then started
laughing again, shaking from side to side. ‘She said - Akbar
Sahib is gracing us with his poetry!’ Tahmina Bai began to
laugh uncontrollably once more, and to Maan’s fuddled
amazement he found himself joining in.

469But Tahmina Bai had not finished her joke, and went on :
‘So when he heard her, the poet made this remark on the spur
of the moment :

“Alas - what poor poetry can Akbar write

When the pen is in his hand and the inkpot upstairs ?” ‘

This was followed by squeals and snorts of laughter. Then
Tahmina Bai told Maan that she herself had something to
show him in the other room, and led him in, while the
Rajkumar took another couple of swigs.

After a few minutes she emerged, with Maan looking
bedraggled and disgusted. But Tahmina Bai was pouting
sweetly. She said to the Rajkumar: ‘Now, I have something to
show you.’

‘No, no,’ said the Rajkumar. ‘I’ve already - no, I’m not in the
mood - come, Maan, let’s go.’

Tahmina Bai looked affronted, and said: ‘Both of you are - are
- very similar ! What do you need me for ?’

The Rajkumar had got up. He put an arm around Maan and
they struggled towards the door. As they walked into the
corridor they heard her say :

‘At least have some biryani before you leave. It will be ready
in a few minutes -‘

Hearing no response from them, Tahmina Bai let fly :

‘It might give you strength. Neither of you could grace me
with your poetry!’

She began to laugh and shake, and her laughter followed them
all the way down the stairs into the street.

6.20

EVEN though he had not done anything as such with her,
Maan was feeling so remorseful about having visited such a
low singing girl as Tahmina Bai that he wanted to go to
Saeeda Bai’s again immediately and beg her forgiveness. The
Rajkumar persuaded him to go home instead. He took him to
the gate of Prem Nivas and left him there.Mrs Mahesh Kapoor

was awake. When she saw Maan so drunk and unsteady she
was very unhappy. Though she did not say anything to him,
she was afraid for him. If his father had seen him in his present
state he would have had a fit.

Maan, guided to his room, fell on his bed and went off to
sleep.

The next day, contrite, he visited Saeeda Bai, and she was glad
to see him. They spent the evening together. But she told him
that she would be occupied for the next two days, and that he
should not take it amiss.

Maan took it greatly amiss. He suffered from acute jealousy
and thwarted desire, and wondered what he had done wrong.
Even if he could have seen Saeeda Bai every evening, his days
would merely have trickled by drop by drop. Now not only the
days but the nights as well stretched interminably ahead of
him, black and empty.

He practised a bit of polo with Firoz, but Firoz was busy
during the days and sometimes even during the evenings with
law or other work. Unlike the young Bespectacled Bannerji,
Firoz did not treat time spent playing polo or deciding on a
proper walking-stick as wasted; he considered these activities
proper to the son of a Nawab. cornpared to Maan, however,
Firoz was an addict to his profession.

Maan tried to follow suit - to do a bit of purchasing and to
seek a few orders for the cloth business in Banaras - but found
it too irksome to pursue. He paid a visit or two to his brother
Pran and his sister Veena, but the very domesticity and
purposefulness of their lives was a rebuke to his own. Veena
told him off roundly, asking him what kind of an example he

thought he was setting for young Bhaskar, and old Mrs Tandon
looked at him even more suspiciously and disapprovingly than
before. Kedarnath, however, patted Maan on the shoulder, as if
to compensate for his mother’s coldness.

Having exhausted all his other possibilities, Maan began to
hang around the Rajkumar of Marh’s set and (though he did
not visit Tarbuz ka Bazaar again) drank and gam-

4?ibled away much of the money that had been reserved for
the business. The gambling - usually flush, but sometimes
even poker, for which there was a recent craze among the
more self-consciously dissolute students in Brahmpur took
place mainly in the students’ rooms, but sometimes in
informal gambling dens in private houses here and there in the
city. Their drink was invariably Scotch. Maan thought of
Saeeda Bai all the time, and declined a visit even to the
beautiful Rupvati. For this he was chaffed by all his new
companions, who told him that he might lose his abilities
permanently for lack of exercise.

One day Maan, separated from his companions, was walking
up and down Nabiganj in a lovesick haze when he bumped
into an old flame of his. She was now married, but retained a
great affection for Maan. Maan too continued to like her a
great deal. Her husband - who had the unlikely nickname of
Pigeon - asked Maan if he would join them for coffee at the
Red Fox. But Maan, who would normally have accepted the
invitation with alacrity, looked away unhappily and said that
he had to be going.

‘Why is your old admirer behaving so strangely?’ said her
husband to her with a smile.

‘I don’t know,’ she said, mystified.

‘Surely he’s not fallen out of love with you.’

‘That’s possible - but unlikely. Maan Kapoor doesn’t fall out
of love with anyone as a rule.’

They let it go at that, and went into the Red Fox.

6.21

MAAN was not the only target of old Mrs Tandon’s
suspicions. Of late, the old lady, who kept tabs on everything,
began to notice that Veena had not been wearing certain items
of her jewellery: that though she continued to wear her inlaws’ pieces, she had ceased to wear those that came from her
parents. One day she reported this matter to her son.

472-Kedarnath paid no attention.

His mother kept at him, until eventually he agreed to ask
Veena to put on her navratan.

Veena flushed. ‘I’ve lent it to Priya, who wants to copy the
design,’ she said. ‘She saw me wear it at Fran’s wedding and
liked it.’

But Veena looked so unhappy with her lie that the truth soon
came out. Kedarnath discovered that running the household

cost far more than she had told him it did ; he, domestically
impractical and often absent, had simply not noticed. She had
hoped that by asking him for less household money she would
reduce the financial pressure on his business. But now he
realized that she had taken steps to pawn or sell her jewellery.

Kedarnath also learned that Bhaskar’s school fees and books
were already being supplied out of Mrs Mahesh Kapoor’s
monthly household money, some of which she diverted to her
daughter.

‘We can’t have that,’ said Kedarnath. ‘Your father helped us
enough three years ago.’

‘Why not?’ demanded Veena. ‘Bhaskar’s Nani is surely
allowed to give him those, why not? It’s not as if she’s
supplying us our rations.’

‘There’s something out of tune with my Veena today,’ said
Kedarnath, smiling a bit sadly.

Veena was not mollified.

‘You never tell me anything,’ she burst out, ‘and then I find
you with your head in your hands, and your eyes closed for
minutes on end. What am I to think ? And you are always
away. Sometimes when you’re away I cry to myself all night
long; it would have been better to have a drunkard as a
husband, as long as he slept here every night.’

‘Now calm down. Where are these jewels ?’

‘Priya has them. She said she’d get me an estimate.’

‘They haven’t yet been sold then ?’

‘No.’

‘Go and get them back.’

‘No.’

473’Go and get them back, Veena. How can you gamble with
your mother’s navratan ?’

‘How can you play chaupar with Bhaskar’s future ?’

Kedarnath closed his eyes for a few seconds.

‘You understand nothing about business,’ he said.

‘I understand enough to know that you can’t keep “overextending” yourself.’

‘Over-extension is just over-extension. All great fortunes are
based on debt.’

‘Well we, I know, will never be greatly fortunate again,’ burst
out Veena passionately. ‘This isn’t Lahore. Why can’t we
guard what little we have ?’

Kedarnath was silent for a while. Then he said :

‘Get the jewellery back. It’s all right, it really is. Haresh’s
arrangement with the brogues is about to come through any
day, and our long term problems will be solved.’

Veena looked at her husband very dubiously.

‘Everything good is always about to happen, and everything
bad always happens.’

‘Now that’s not true. At least in the short term something good
has happened to me. The shops in Bombay have paid up at
last. I promise you that that is true. I know I’m a bad liar, so I
don’t even attempt it. Now get the navratan back.’

‘Show me the money fast’.’

Kedarnath burst out laughing. Veena burst into tears.

‘Where’s Bhaskar ?’ he asked, after she had sobbed for a bit
and subsided into silence.

‘At Dr Durrani’s.’

‘Good. I hope he stays there a couple of hours more. Let’s play
a game of chaupar, you and I.’

Veena dabbed at her eyes with her handkerchief.

‘It’s too hot on the roof. Your mother won’t want her beloved
son to turn black as ink.’

‘Well, we’ll play in this room, then,’ said Kedarnath with
decision.

Veena got the jewellery back late that afternoon. Priya was

474not able to give her an estimate; with the witch hanging
around the gossipy jeweller every minute of his previous visit,
she had decided to subjugate urgency to discretion.

Veena looked at the navratan, gazing reminiscently at each
stone in turn.

Early the same evening, Kedarnath went over with it to his
father-in-law, and asked him to keep it in his custody at Prem
Nivas.

‘What on earth for?’ asked Mahesh Kapoor. ‘Why are you
bothering me with these trinkets ?’

‘Baoji, it belongs to Veena, and I want to make sure she keeps
it. If it’s in my house, she might suddenly be struck with noble

fancies and pawn it.’

‘Pawn it ?’

‘Pawn it or sell it.’

‘What madness. What’s been going on? Have all my children
taken leave of their senses ?’

After a brief account of the navratan incident, Mahesh Kapoor
said :

‘And how is your business now that the strike is finally over ?’

‘I can’t say it’s going well - but it hasn’t collapsed yet.’

‘Kedarnath, run my farm instead.’

‘No, but thank you, Baoji. I should be getting back now. The
market must have opened already.’ A further thought struck
him. ‘And besides, Baoji, who would mind your constituency
if I decided to leave Misri Mandi ?’

‘True. All right. Fine. It’s good that you have to go back
because I have to deal with these files before tomorrow
morning,’ said Mahesh Kapoor inhospitably. Til be working
all night. Put it down here somewhere.’

‘What - on the files, Baoji ?’ There, was nowhere else on the
table to place the navratan.

‘Where else then - around my neck? Yes, yes, on that pink
one: “Orders of the State Government on the Assessment
Proposals”. Don’t look so anxious, Kedarnath, it won’t
disappear again. I’ll see that Veena’s mother puts the stupid
thing away somewhere.’

4756.22

LATER that night in the house where the Rajkumar and his
friends lived, Maan lost more than two hundred rupees
gambling on flush. He usually held onto his cards far too long
before packing them in or asking for a show. The predictability
of his optimism was fatal to his chances. Besides, he was
entirely un-poker-faced, and his fellowplayers had a shrewd
idea of how good his cards were from the instant he picked
them up. He lost ten rupees or more on hand after hand - and
when he held three kings, all he won was four rupees.

The more he drank, the more he lost, and vice versa.

Every time he got a queen - or begum - in his hand, he

“î”—iè“x « :V., -=. V”

“fo ‘-?- -”^.TL«Cj,^-A.’;-ilAvi-o. *»l^v^vxxt *.aa

allowed to see so rarely these days. He could sense that even
when he was with her, despite their mutual excitement and

affection, she was finding him less amusing as he became
more intense.

After he had got completely cleaned out, he muttered in a
slurred voice that he had to be off.

‘Spend the night here if you wish - go home in the morning,’
suggested the Rajkumar. ‘No, no -‘ said Maan, and left.

tfe. wyj/teit-i wra Vî, S-att-iit Çra/s, Tfcc/ûmg -stnrre pu^rry
on the way and singing from time to time.

It was past midnight. The watchman, seeing the state he was
in, asked him to go home. Maan started singing, appealing
over his head to Saeeda Bai :

‘It’s just a heart, not brick and stone, why should it then

not fill with pain ?

Yes, I will weep a thousand times, why should you

torture me in vain ?’

‘Kapoor Sahib, you will wake up everyone on the street,’ said
the watchman matter-of-factly. He bore Maan no grudge for
the scuffle they had had the other night.

Bibbo came out and chided Maan gently. ‘Kindly go

476home, Dagh Sahib. This is a respectable house. Begum
Sahiba asked who was singing, and when I told her, she was
most annoyed. I believe she is fond of you, Dagh Sahib, but
she will not see you tonight, and she has asked me to tell you
that she will never see you in this state. Please forgive my
impertinence, I am only repeating her words.’

‘It’s just a heart, not brick and stone,’ sang Maan.

‘Come, Sahib,’ said the watchman calmly and led Maan gently
but firmly down the street in the direction of Prem Nivas.

‘Here, this is for you - you’re a good man -‘ said Maan,
reaching into his kurta pockets. He turned them inside out, but
there was no money in them.

‘Take my tip on account, ‘ he suggested.

‘Yes, Sahib,’ said the watchman, and turned back to the rosecoloured house.

6.23

DRUNK, broke, and far from happy, Maan tottered back to
Prem Nivas. To bis surprise and rather unfocused distress, his
mother was waiting up for him again. “When she saw him,
tears rolled down her cheeks. She was already overwrought
because of the business with the navratan.

‘Maan, my dear son, what has come over you ? What has she
done to my boy ? Do you know what people are saying about
you ? Even the Banaras people know by now.’

‘What Banaras people?’ Maan inquired, his curiosity aroused.

‘What Banaras people, he asks,’ said Mrs Mahesh Kapoor, and
began to cry even more intensely. There was a strong smell of
whisky on her son’s breath.

Maan put his arm protectively around her shoulder, and told
her to go to sleep. She told him to go up to his room by the
garden stairs to avoid disturbing his father, who was working
late in his office.

477But Maan, who had not taken in this last instruction, went
humming off to bed by the main stairs.

‘Who’s that ? Who’s that ? Is it Maan ?’ came his father’s
angry voice.

‘Yes, Baoji,’ said Maan, and continued to walk up the stairs.

‘Did you hear me?’ called his father in a voice that
reverberated across half of Prem Nivas.

‘Yes, Baoji,’ Maan stopped.

‘Then come down here at once.’

‘Yes, Baoji.’ Maan stumbled down the stairs and into his
father’s office. He sat down on the chair across the small table
at which his father was sitting. There was no one in the office
besides the two of them and a couple of lizards that kept
scurrying across the ceiling throughout their conversation.

‘Stand up. Did I tell you to sit down ?’

Maan tried to stand up, but failed. Then he tried again, and
leaned across the table towards his father. His eyes were
glazed. The papers on the table and the glass of water near his
father’s hand seemed to frighten him.

Mahesh Kapoor stood up, his mouth set in a tight line, his eyes
stern. He had a file in his right hand, which he slowly
transferred to his left. He was about to slap Maan hard across
the face when Mrs Mahesh Kapoor rushed in and said :

‘Don’t - don’t - don’t do that-‘

Her voice and eyes pleaded with her husband, and he relented.
Maan, meanwhile, closed his eyes and collapsed back into the
chair. He began to drift off to sleep.

His father, enraged, came around the table, and started shaking
him as if he wanted to jolt every bone in his body.

‘Baoji!’ said Maan, awoken by the sensation, and began to
laugh.

His father raised his right arm again, and with the back of his
hand slapped his twenty-five-year-old son across the face.
Maan gasped, stared at his father, and raised his hand to touch
his cheek.

478Mrs Mahesh Kapoor sat down on one of the benches that
ran along the wall. She was crying.

‘Now you listen, Maan, unless you want another of those listen to me,’ said his father, even more furious now that his
wife was crying because of something he had done. ‘I don’t
care how much of this you remember tomorrow morning but I
am not going to wait until you are sober. Do you understand ?’
He raised his voice and repeated, ‘Do you understand ?’

Maan nodded his head, suppressing his first instinct, which
was to close his eyes again. He was so sleepy that he could
only hear a few words drifting in and out of his consciousness.
Somewhere, it seemed to him, there was a sort of tingling
pain. But whose ?

‘Have you seen yourself? Can you imagine how you look ?
Your hair wild, your eyes glazed, your pockets hanging out, a
whisky stain all the way down your kurta -‘

Maan shook his head, then let it droop gently on his chest. All
he wanted to do was to cut off what was going on outside his
head: this angry face, this shouting, this tingling.

He yawned.

Mahesh Kapoor picked up the glass and threw the water on
Maan’s face. Some of it fell on his own papers but he didn’t
even look down at them. Maan coughed and choked and sat up
with a start. His mother covered her eyes with her hands and
sobbed.

‘What did you do with the money? What did you do with it ?’
asked Mahesh Kapoor.

‘What money ?’ asked Maan, watching the water drip down
the front of his kurta, one channel taking the route of his
whisky stain.

‘The business money.’

Maan shrugged, and frowned in concentration.

‘And the spending money I gave you ?’ continued his father
threateningly.

Maan frowned in deeper concentration, and shrugged again.

‘What did you do with it ? I’ll tell you what you did with

479it - you spent it on that whore.’ Mahesh Kapoor would
never have referred to Saeeda Bai in such terms if he had not
been driven beyond the limit of restraint.

Mrs Mahesh Kapoor put her hands to her ears. Her husband
snorted. She was behaving, he thought impatiently, like all
three of Gandhiji’s monkeys rolled into one. She would be
clapping her hands over her mouth next.

Maan looked at his father, thought for a second, then said,
‘No. I only brought her small presents. She never

asked for anything more ‘ He was wondering to himself

where the money could have gone.

‘Then you must have drunk and gambled it away,’ said his
father in disgust.

Ah yes, that was it, recalled Maan, relieved. Aloud he said, in
a pleased tone, as if an intractable problem had, after long
endeavour, suddenly been solved :

‘Yes, that is it, Baoji. Drunk - gambled - gone.’ Then the
implications of this last word struck him, and he looked
shamefaced.

‘Shameless - shameless - you are behaving worse than a
depraved zamindar, and I will not have it,’ cried Mahesh
Kapoor. He thumped the pink file in front of him. ‘I will not
have it, and I will not have you here any longer. Get out of
town, get out of Brahmpur. Get out at once. I will not have you
here. You are ruining your mother’s peace of mind, and your
own life, and my political career, and our family reputation. I
give you money, and what do you do with it ? - you gamble
with it or spend it on whores or on whisky. Is debauchery your

only skill ? I never thought I would be ashamed of a son of
mine. If you want to see someone with real hardships look at
your brother-in-law he never asks for money for his business,
let alone “for this and for that”. And what of your fiancée? We
find a suitable girl from a good family, we arrange a good
match for you - and then you chase after Saeeda Bai, whose
life and history are an open book.’

‘But I love her,’ said Maan.

‘Love ?’ cried his father, his incredulity mixed with rage. ‘Go
to bed at once. This is your last night in this house. I

480want you out by tomorrow. Get out! Go to Banaras or
wherever you choose, but get out of Brahmpur. Out!’

Mrs Mahesh Kapoor begged her husband to rescind this
drastic command, but to no avail. Maan looked at the two
geckos on the ceiling as they scurried about to and fro. Then suddenly - he got up with great resolution and without
assistance, and said:

‘All right. Goodnight! Goodnight! Goodnight! I’ll go! I’ll
leave this house tomorrow.’

And he went off to bed without help, even remembering to
take off his shoes before he fell off to sleep.

6.24

THE next morning he woke up with a dreadful headache,
which, however, cleared up miraculously in a couple of hours.
He remembered that his father and he had exchanged words,
and waited till the Minister of Revenue had gone to the
Assembly before he went to ask his mother what it was they
had said to each other. Mrs Mahesh Kapoor was at her wits’
end: her husband had been so incensed last night that he hadn’t
slept for hours. Nor had he been able to work, and this had
incensed him further. Any suggestion of reconciliation from
her had met with an almost incoherently angry rebuke from
him. She realized that he was quite serious, that Maan would
have to leave. Hugging her son to her she said :

‘Go back to Banaras, work hard, behave responsibly, win back
your father’s heart.’

None of these four clauses appealed particularly to Maan, but
he assured his mother that he would not cause trouble at Prem
Nivas any longer. He ordered a servant to pack his things. He
decided that he would go and stay with Firoz; or, failing that,
with Pran; or, failing that, with the Rajkumar and his friends;
or, failing that, somewhere else in Brahmpur. He would not
leave this beautiful city or forgo the chance to meet the woman
he loved because his disapproving, desiccated father told him
so.

481’Shall I get your father’s PA to arrange your ticket to
Banaras ?’ asked Mrs Mahesh Kapoor.

‘No. If I need to, I’ll do that at the station.’

After shaving and bathing he donned a crisp white kurtapyjama and made his way a little shamefacedly towards
Saeeda Bai’s house. If he had been as drunk as his mother

seemed to think he had been, he supposed that he must have
been equally so outside Saeeda Bai’s gate, where he had a
vague sense of having gone.

He arrived at Saeeda Bai’s house. He was admitted.
Apparently, he was expected.

On the way up the stairs, he glanced at himself in the mirror.
Unlike before, he now looked at himself quite critically. A
white, embroidered cap covered his head; he took it off and
surveyed his prematurely balding temples before putting it on
again, thinking ruefully that perhaps it was his baldness that
Saeeda Bai did not like. ‘But what can I do about it ?’ he
thought.

When she heard his step on the corridor, Saeeda Bai called out
in a welcoming voice, ‘Come in, come in, Dagh Sahib. Your
footsteps sound regular today. Let us hope that your heart is
beating as regularly.’

Saeeda Bai had slept over the question of Maan and had
concluded that something had to be done. Though she had to
admit to herself that he was good for her, he was getting to be
too demanding of her time and energy, too obsessively
attached, for her to handle easily.

When Maan told her about his scene with his father, and that
he had been thrown out of the house, she was very upset. Prem
Nivas, where she sang regularly at Holi and had once sung at
Dussehra, had become a regular fixture of her annual calendar.
She had to consider the question of her income. Equally
importantly, she did not want her young friend to remain in
trouble with his father. ‘Where do you plan to go ?’ she asked
him.

‘Why, nowhere!’ exclaimed Maan. ‘My father has delusions of
grandeur. He thinks that because he can strip a million
landlords of their inheritance, he can equally easily order his
son about. I am going to stay in Brahmpur - withfriends.’ A
sudden thought struck him. ‘Why not here ?’ he asked.

‘Toba, toba!’ cried Saeeda Bai, putting her hands to her
shocked ears.

‘Why should I be separated from you ? From the town where
you live ?’ He leaned towards her and began to embrace her.
‘And your cook makes such delicious shami kababs,’ he
added.

Saeeda Bai might have been pleased by Maan’s ardour, but she
was thinking hard. ‘I know,’ she said, disengaging herself. ‘I
know what you must do.’

‘Mmh,’ said Maan, attempting to engage himself again.

‘Do sit still and listen, Dagh Sahib,’ said Saeeda Bai in a
coquettish voice. ‘You want to be close to me, to understand
me, don’t you ?’

‘Yes, yes, of course.’

‘Why, Dagh Sahib ?’

‘Why ?’ asked Maan incredulously.

‘Why ?’ persisted Saeeda Bai.

‘Because I love you.’

‘What is love - this ill-natured thing that makes enemies even
of friends ?’

This was too much for Maan, who was in no mood to get
involved in abstract speculations. A sudden, horrible thought
struck him : ‘Do you want me to go as well ?’

Saeeda Bai was silent, then she tugged her sari, which had
slipped down slightly, back over her head. Her kohlblackened
eyes seemed to look into Maan’s very soul.

‘Dagh Sahib, Dagh Sahib!’ she rebuked him.

Maan was instantly repentant, and hung his head. ‘I just feared
that you might want to test our love by distance,’ he said.

‘That would cause me as much pain as you,’ she told him
sadly. ‘But what I was thinking was quite different.’

She was silent, then played a few notes on the harmonium and
said:

‘Your Urdu teacher, Rasheed, is leaving for his village in a few
days. He will be gone for a month. I don’t know how to

arrange for an Arabic teacher for Tasneem or an

483Urdu teacher for you in his absence. And I feel that in
order to understand me truly, to appreciate my art, to resonate
to my passion, you must learn my language, the language of
the poetry I recite, the ghazals I sing, the very thoughts I
think.’

‘Yes, yes,’ whispered Maan, enraptured.

‘So you must go to the village with your Urdu teacher for a
while - for a month.’

‘What?’ cried Maan, who felt that another glass of water had
been flung in his face.

Saeeda Bai was apparently so upset by her own solution to the
problem - it was the obvious solution, she murmured, biting
her lower lip sadly, but she did not know how she could bear
being separated from him, etc. - that in a few minutes it was
Maan who was consoling her rather than she him. It was the
only way out of the problem, he assured her : even if he had
nowhere to live in the village, he would sleep in the open, he
would speak think - write - the language of her soul, he would
send her letters written in the Urdu of an angel. Even his father
would be proud of him.

‘You have made me see that there is no other way,’ said
Saeeda Bai at length, letting herself be convinced gradually.

Maan noticed that the parakeet, who was in the room with
them, was giving him a cynical look. He frowned.

‘When is Rasheed leaving ?’

‘Tomorrow.’

Maan went pale. ‘But that only leaves tonight!’ he cried, his
heart sinking. His courage failed him. ‘No - I can’t go - I can’t
leave you.’

‘Dagh Sahib, if you are faithless to your own logic, how can I
believe you will be faithful to me ?’

‘Then I must spend this evening here. It will be our last night
together in a - in a month.’

A month ? Even as he said the word, his mind rebelled at the
thought. He refused to accept it.

‘It will not work this evening,’ said Saeeda Bai in a practical
tone, thinking of her commitments.

484’Then I won’t go,’ cried Maan. ‘I can’t. How can I ?
Anyway, we haven’t consulted Rasheed.’

‘Rasheed will be honoured to give you hospitality. He respects
your father very much - no doubt because of his skill as a
woodcutter - and, of course, he respects you very much - no
doubt because of your skill as a calligrapher.’

‘I must see you tonight,’ insisted Maan. ‘I must. What
woodcutter ?’ he added, frowning.

Saeeda Bai sighed. ‘It is very difficult to cut down a banyan
tree, Dagh Sahib, especially one that has been rooted so long
in the soil of this province. But I can hear your father’s
impatient axe on the last of its trunks. Soon it will be Tom
from the earth. The snakes will be driven from its roots and the
termites burned with its rotten wood. But what will happen to
the birds and monkeys who sang or chattered in its branches ?
Tell me that, Dagh Sahib. This is how things stand with us
today.’ Then, seeing Maan look crestfallen, she added, with
another sigh: ‘Come at one o’clock in the morning. I will tell
your friend the watchman to make the Shahenshah’s entry a
triumphal one.’

Maan felt that she might be laughing at him. But the thought
of seeing her tonight cheered him up instantly, even if he knew
she was merely sweetening a bitter pill.

‘Of course, I can’t promise anything,’ Saeeda Bai went on. ‘If
he tells you I am asleep, you must not make a scene or wake
up the neighbourhood.’

It was Maan’s turn to sigh :

‘If Mir so loudly goes on weeping, How can his neighbour go
on sleeping ?’

But, as it happened, everything worked out well. Abdur
Rasheed agreed to house Maan in his village and to continue
to teach him Urdu. Mahe’sh Kapoor, who had been afraid that
Maan might attempt to defy him by staying in Brahmpur, was

not altogether displeased that he would not be going to
Banaras, for he knew what Maan did not that the cloth
business was doing pretty well without him.

485Mrs Mahesh Kapoor (though she would miss him) was
glad that he would be in the charge of a strict and sober
teacher and away from ‘that’. Maan did at least receive the
ecstatic sop of a last passionate night with Saeeda Bai. And
Saeeda Bai heaved a sigh of relief tinged only slightly with
regret when morning came.

A few hours later a glum Maan, fretting and exasperated at
being so neatly pincered by his father and his beloved,
together with Rasheed, who was conscious for the moment
only of the pleasure of getting out of congested Brahmpur into
the openness of the countryside, were on board a narrowgauge train that swung in a painfully slow and halting arc
towards Rudhia District and Rasheed’s home village.

6.25

TASNEEM did not realize till Rasheed had gone how much
she had enjoyed her Arabic lessons. Everything else she did
was related to the household, and opened no windows onto a
larger world. But her serious young teacher, with his insistence
on the importance of grammar and his refusal to compromise
with her tendency to take flight when faced with difficulties,
had made her aware that she had within herself an ability for
application that she had not known. She admired him, too,
because he was making his own way in the world without
support from his family. And when he refused to answer her
sister’s summons because he was explaining a passage from
the Quran to her, she had greatly approved of his sense of
principle.

All this admiration was silent. Rasheed had never once
indicated that he was interested in her in any way other than as
a teacher. Their hands had never touched accidentally over a
book. That this should not have happened over a span of
weeks spoke of deliberateness on his part, for in the ordinary
innocent course of things it was bound to have occurred by
chance, even if they had instantly drawn back afterwards.

486I

•fl*’.

Now he would be out of Brahmpur for a month, and Tasneem
found herself feeling sad, far sadder than the loss of Arabic
lessons would have accounted for. Ishaq Khan, sensing her
mood, and the cause for it as well, tried to cheer her up.

‘Listen, Tasneem.’

‘Yes, Ishaq Bhai ?’ Tasneem replied, a little listlessly.

‘Why do you insist on that “Bhai” ?’ said Ishaq.

Tasneem was silent.

‘All right, call me brother if you wish - just get out of that
tearful mood.’

‘I can’t,’ said Tasneem. ‘I’m feeling sad.’

‘Poor Tasneem. He’ll be back,’ said Ishaq, trying not to sound
anything but sympathetic.

‘I wasn’t thinking of him,’ said Tasneem quickly. ‘I was
thinking that I’ll have nothing useful to do now except read
novels and cut vegetables. Nothing useful to learn -‘

‘Well, you could teach, even if not learn,’ said Ishaq Khan,
attempting to sound bright.

‘Teach?’

‘Teach Miya Mitthu how to speak. The first few months of life
are very important in the education of a parakeet.’

Tasneem brightened up for a second. Then she said: ‘Apa has
appropriated my parakeet. The cage is always in her room,
seldom in mine.’ She sighed. ‘It seems,’ she added under her
breath, ‘that everything of mine becomes hers.’

Til get it,’ said Ishaq Khan gallantly.

‘Oh, you mustn’t,’ said Tasneem. ‘Your hands -‘

‘Oh, I’m not as crippled as all that.’

‘But it must be bad. Whenever I see you practising, I can see
how painful it is from your face.’

‘What if it is ?’ said Ishaq Khan. ‘I have to play and I have to
practise.’

‘Why don’t you show it to a doctor ?’

‘It’ll go away.’

‘Still - there’s no harm in having it seen.’

‘All right,’ said Ishaq with a smile. ‘I will, because you’ve
asked me to.’

487Sometimes when Ishaq accompanied Saeeda Bai these
days it was all he could do not to cry out in pain. This trouble
in his wrists had grown worse. What was strange was that it
now affected both his wrists, despite the fact that his two
hands - the right on the bow and the left on the strings performed very different functions.

Since his livelihood and that of the younger brothers whom he
supported depended on his hands, he was extremely anxious.
As for the transfer of his brother-in-law : Ishaq had not dared
to try to get an interview with the Station Director - who
would certainly have heard about what had happened in the
canteen and who would have been very unfavourably disposed
towards him, especially if the great Ustad himself had made it
a point to express his displeasure.

Ishaq Khan remembered his father saying to him, ‘Practise at
least four hours every day. Clerks push their pens in offices for
longer than that, and you cannot insult your art by offering
less.’ Ishaq’s father would sometimes - in the middle of a
conversation - take Ishaq’s left hand and look at it carefully ; if
the string-abraded grooves in the fingernails showed signs of
recent wear, he would say, ‘Good.’ Otherwise he would
merely continue with the conversation, not visibly but
palpably disappointed. Of late, because of the sometimes
tmbearaWe pain in the tendons of his wrists, Ishaq Khan had
been unable to practise for more than an hour or two a day.
But the moment the pain let up he increased the regimen.

Sometimes it was difficult to concentrate on other matters.
Lifting a cage, stirring his tea, opening a door, every action
reminded him of his hands. He could turn to no one for help. If
he told Saeeda Bai how painful it had become to accompany
her, especially in fast passages, would he be able to blame her
if she looked for someone else?

‘It is not sensible to practise so much. You should rest and use
some balm,’ murmured Tasneem.

‘Do you think I don’t want to rest - do you think it’s easier for
me to practise -‘

488’But you must use proper medicine : it is very unwise not
to,’ said Tasneem.

‘Go and get some for me, then -‘ said Ishaq Khan with sudden
and uncharacteristic sharpness. ‘Everyone sympathizes,
everyone advises, no one helps. Go - go -‘

He stopped dead, and covered his eyes with his right hand. He
did not want to open them.

He imagined Tasneem’s startled face, her deer-like eyes
starting with tears. If pain has made me so selfish, he thought,
I will have to rest and restore myself, even if it means risking
my work.

Aloud, after he had collected himself, he said : ‘Tasneem, you
will have to help me. Talk to your sister and tell her what I
can’t.’ He sighed. ‘I’ll speak to her later. I cannot find other
work in my present state. She will have to keep me on even if I
cannot play for a while.’

Tasneem said, ‘Yes.’ Her voice betrayed that she was, as he
had thought, crying silently.

‘Please don’t take what I said badly,’ continued Ishaq. Tm not
myself. I will rest.’ He shook his head from side to side.

Tasneem put her hand on his shoulder. He became very still,
and remained so even when she took it away.

Til talk to Apa,’ she said, ‘Should I go now ?’

‘Yes. No, stay here for a while.’

‘What do you want to talk about ?’ said Tasneem.

‘I don’t want to talk,’ said Ishaq. After a pause he looked up
and saw her face. It was tear-stained.

He looked down again, then said : ‘May I use that pen ?’

Tasneem handed him the wooden pen with its broad split
bamboo nib that Rasheed made her use for her calligraphy.
The letters it wrote were large, almost childishly so; the dots
above the letters came out like little rhombuses.

Ishaq Khan thought for a minute while she watched him.
Then, drawing to himself a large sheet of lined paper - which
she used for her exercises - he wrote a few lines with some
effort, and handed them to her wordlessly even before the ink
was dry :

489Dear hands, that cause me so much pain, When can I gain
your use again ?

When can we once again be friends ? Forgive me, and I’ll
make amends.

Never again will I enforce My fiat, disciplined and coarse

Without consulting both of you On any work we need to do,

Nor cause you seizure or distress But win your trust through
gentleness.

He looked at her while her lovely, liquid eyes moved from
right to left, noticing with a kind of painful pleasure the flush
that came to her face as they rested on the final couplet.

6.26

WHEN Tasneem entered her sister’s bedroom, she found her
sitting in front of the mirror applying kajal to her eyelids.

Most people have an expression that they reserve exclusively
for looking at themselves in the mirror. Some pout, others arch
their eyebrows, still others look superciliously down their
noses at themselves. Saeeda Bai had a whole range of mirror
faces. Just as her comments to her parakeet ran the gamut of
emotions from passion to annoyance, so too did these
expressions. When Tasneem entered, she was moving her head
slowly from side to side with a dreamy air. It would have been
difficult to guess that her thick black hair had just revealed a
single white one, and that she was looking around for others.

A silver paan container was resting among the vials and phials
on her dressing table and Saeeda Bai was eating a

490f

couple of paans laced with the fragrant, semi-solid tobacco
known as kimam. When Tasneem appeared in the mirror and
their eyes met, the first thought that struck Saeeda Bai was that
she, Saeeda, was getting old and that in five years she would
be forty. Her expression changed to one of melancholy, and
she turned back to her own face in the mirror, looking at
herself in the iris, first of one eye, then of the other. Then,

recalling the guest whom she had invited to the house in the
evening, she smiled at herself in affectionate welcome.

‘What’s the matter, Tasneem, tell me,’ she said - somewhat
indistinctly, because of the paan.

‘Apa,’ said Tasneem nervously, ‘it’s about Ishaq.’

‘Has he been teasing you ?’ said Saeeda Bai a little sharply,
misinterpreting Tasneem’s nervousness. ‘I’ll speak to him.
Send him here.’

‘No, no, Apa, it’s this,’ said Tasneem, and handed her sister
Ishaq’s poem.

After reading it through Saeeda Bai set it down, and started
toying with the only lipstick on the dressing table. She never
used lipstick, as her lips had a natural redness which was
enhanced by paan, but it had been given to her a long time ago
by the guest who would be coming this evening, and to whom
she was, in a mild sort of way, sentimentally attached.

‘What do you think, Apa ?’ said Tasneem. ‘Say something.’

‘It’s well expressed and badly written,’ said Saeeda Bai, ‘but
what does it mean? He’s not going on about his hands, is he ?’

‘They are giving him a lot of pain,’ said Tasneem, ‘and he’s
afraid that if he speaks to you, you’ll ask him to leave.’

Saeeda Bai, remembering with a smile how she had got Maan
to leave, was silent. She was about to apply a drop of perfume
to her wrist when Bibbo came in with a great bustle.

‘Oh-hoh, what is it now ?’ said Saeeda Bai. ‘Go out, you
wretched girl, can’t I have a moment of peace ? Have you fed
the parakeet ?’

491’Yes, Begum Sahiba,’ said Bibbo impertinently. ‘But what
shall I tell the cook to feed you and your guest this evening ?’

Saeeda Bai addressed Bibbo’s reflection in the mirror sternly :

‘Wretched girl, you will never amount to anything even after
having stayed here so long you have not acquired the slightest
sense of etiquette or discrimination.’

Bibbo looked unconvincingly penitent. Saeeda Bai went on :
‘Find out what is growing in the kitchen garden and come
back after five minutes.’

When Bibbo had disappeared, Saeeda Bai said to Tasneem :

‘So he’s sent you to speak to me, has he ?’ ‘No,’ said
Tasneem. ‘I came myself. I thought he needed help.’

‘You’re sure he hasn’t been misbehaving ?’

Tasneem shook her head.

‘Maybe he can write a ghazal or two for me to sing,’ said
Saeeda Bai after a pause. ‘I’ll have to put him to some sort of
work. Provisionally, at least.’ She applied a drop of perfume.
‘I suppose his hand works well enough to allow him to write
?’

‘Yes,’ said Tasneem happily.

‘Then let’s leave it at that,’ said Saeeda Bai.

But in her mind she was thinking about a permanent
replacement. She knew she couldn’t support Ishaq endlessly or till some indefinite time when his hands decided to behave.

‘Thank you, Apa,’ said Tasneem, smiling.

‘Don’t thank me,’ said Saeeda Bai crossly. ‘I am used to
taking all the world’s troubles onto my own head. Now I’ll
have to find a sarangi player till your Ishaq Bhai is capable of
wrestling with his sarangi again, and I also have to find
someone to teach you Arabic -‘

‘Oh, no, no,’ said Tasneem quickly, ‘you needn’t do that.’

‘I needn’t do that ?’ said Saeeda Bai, turning around to face
not Tasneem’s image but Tasneem herself. ‘I thought you
enjoyed your Arabic lessons.’

492.Bibbo had bounced back into the room again. Saeeda Bai
looked at her impatiently and cried, ‘Yes, yes, Bibbo? What is
it ? I told you to come back after five minutes.’

‘But I’ve found out what’s ripe in the back garden,’ said Bibbo
enthusiastically.

‘All right, all right,’ said Saeeda Bai, defeated. ‘What is there
apart from ladies’ fingers ? Has the karela begun ?’

‘Yes, Begum Sahiba, and there is even a pumpkin.’

‘Well, then, tell the cook to make kababs as usual shami
kababs - and some vegetable of her choice - and let her make
mutton with karela as well.’

Tasneem made a slight grimace, which was not lost on Saeeda
Bai.

‘If you find the karela too bitter, you don’t have to eat it,’ she
said in an impatient voice. ‘No one is forcing you. I work my
heart out to keep you in comfort, and you don’t appreciate it.
And oh yes,’ she said, turning to Bibbo again, ‘let’s have some
phirni afterwards.’

‘But there’s so little sugar left from our ration,’ cried Bibbo.

‘Get it on the black market,’ said Saeeda Bai. ‘Bilgrami Sahib
is very fond of phirni.’

Then she dismissed both Tasneem and Bibbo, and continued
with her toilette in peace.

The guest whom she was expecting that evening was an old
friend. He was a doctor, a general practitioner about ten years
older than her, good-looking and cultivated. He was
unmarried, and had proposed to her a number of times.
Though at one stage he had been a client, he was now a friend.
She felt no passion for him, but was grateful that he was
always there when she needed him. She had not seen him for
about three months now, and that was why she had invited him
over this evening. He was bound to propose to her again, and
this would cheer her up. Her refusal, being equally inevitable,
would not upset him unduly.

She looked around the room, and her eyes fell on the framed
picture of the woman looking out through an archway into a
mysterious garden.

493By now, she thought, Dagh Sahib will have reached his
destination. I did not really want to send him off, but I did. He
did not really want to go, but he did. Well, it is all for the best.

Dagh Sahib, however, would not have agreed with this
assessment.

6.27

ISHAQ KHAN waited for Ustad Majeed Khan not far from
his house. When he came out, carrying a small string bag in
his hand, walking gravely along, Ishaq followed him at a
distance. He turned towards Tarbuz ka Bazaar, past the road
leading to the mosque, then into the comparatively open area

of the local vegetable market. He moved from stall to stall to
see if there was something that interested him. It was good to
see tomatoes still plentiful and at a tolerable price so late in the
season. Besides, they made the market look more cheerful. It
was a pity that the season for spinach was almost over; it was
one of his favourite vegetables. And carrots, cauliflowers,
cabbages, all were virtually gone till next winter. Even those
few that were available were dry, dingy, and dear, and had
none of the flavour of their peak.

It was with thoughts such as these that the maestro was
occupied that morning when he heard a voice say, respectfully
:

‘Adaab arz, Ustad Sahib.’

Ustad Majeed Khan turned to see Ishaq. A single glance at the
young man was sufficient to remove the ease of his
meditations and to remind him of the insults that he had had to
face in the canteen. His face grew dark with the memory; he
picked up two or three tomatoes from the stall, and asked their
price.

‘I have a request to make of you.’ It was Ishaq Khan again.

‘Yes?’ The contempt in the great musician’s voice was
unmistakable. As he recalled, it was after he had offered

494his help to the young man in some footling matter that the
whole exchange had occurred. ‘I also have an apology to
make.’ ‘Please do not waste my time.’

‘I have followed you here from your house. I need your help. I
am in trouble. I need work to support myself and my younger
brothers, and I cannot get it. After that day, All India Radio
has not called me even once to perform.’ The maestro
shrugged his shoulders. ‘I beg of you, Ustad Sahib, whatever
you think of me, do not ruin my family. You knew my father
and grandfather. Excuse any mistake that I may have made for
their sakes.’ ‘That you may have made ?’

‘That I have made. I do not know what came over me.’ ‘I am
not ruining you. Go in peace.’ ‘Ustad Sahib, since that day I
have had no work, and my sister’s husband has heard nothing
about his transfer from Lucknow. I dare not approach the
Director.’

‘But you dare approach me. You follow me from my house -‘

‘Only to get the chance to speak to you. You might understand
- as a fellow musician.’ The Ustad winced. ‘And of late my
hands have been giving me trouble. I showed them to a doctor,
but -‘

‘I had heard,’ said the maestro dryly, but did not mention
where.

‘My employer has made it clear to me that I cannot be
supported for my own sake much longer.’

‘Your employer!’ The great singer was about to walk on in
disgust when he added: ‘Go and thank God for that. Throw
yourself on His mercy.’

‘I am throwing myself on yours,’ said Ishaq Khan desperately.

‘I have said nothing for or against you to the Station Director.
What happened that morning I shall put down to an aberration
in your brain. If your work has fallen off, that is not my doing.
In any case, with your hands, what do you propose to do? You
are very proud of your long hours of practice. My advice to
you is to practise less.’

495This had been Tasneem’s advice as well. Ishaq Khan
nodded miserably. There was no hope, and since his pride had
already suffered through his desperation, he felt that he could
lose nothing by completing the apology he had begun and that
he had come to believe he should make.

‘On another matter,’ he said, ‘if I may presume on your further
indulgence - I have been wishing for a long time to apologize
for what I know is not forgivable. That morning, Ustad Sahib,
the reason why I made so bold as to sit at your table in the
canteen was because I had heard your Todi just a little earlier.’

The maestro, who had been examining the vegetables, turned
towards him slightly.

‘I had been sitting beneath the neem tree outside with those
friends of mine. One of them had a radio. We were entranced,
at least I was. I thought I would find some way of saying so to
you. But then things went wrong, and other thoughts took
over.’

He could not say any more by way of apology without, he felt,
bringing in other matters - such as the memory of his own
father, which he felt that the Ustad had demeaned.

Ustad Majeed Khan nodded his head almost imperceptibly by
way of acknowledgment. He looked at the young man’s hands,
noticing the worn groove in the fingernail, and for a second he
also found himself wondering why he did not have a bag to
carry his vegetables home in.

‘So - you liked my Todi,’ he said.

‘Yours - or God’s,’ said Ishaq Khan. ‘I felt that the great
Tansen himself would have listened rapt to that rendering of
his raag. But since then I have never been able to listen to
you.’

The maestro frowned, but did not deign to ask Ishaq what he
meant by that last remark.

‘I will be practising Todi this morning,’ said Ustad Majeed
Khan. ‘Follow me after this.’

Ishaq’s face expressed complete disbelief; it was as if heaven
had fallen into his hands. He forgot his hands, his pride, the
financial desperation that had forced him to speak to Ustad
Majeed Khan. He merely listened as if in a

496dream to the Ustad’s further conversation with the
vegetable seller :

‘How much are these ?’

‘Two-and-a-half annas per pao,’ replied the vegetable seller.

‘Beyond Subzipur you can get them for one-and-a-half annas.’

‘Bhai Sahib, these are not the prices of Subzipur but of
Chowk.’

‘Very high, these prices of yours.’

‘Oh, we had a child last year - since then my prices have gone
up.’ The vegetable seller, seated calmly on the ground on a bit
of jute matting, looked up at the Ustad.

Ustad Majeed Khan did not smile at the vendor’s quips. ‘Two
annas per pao - that’s it.’

‘I have to earn my meals from you, Sir, not from the charity of
a gurudwara.’

‘All right - all right -‘ And Ustad Majeed Khan threw him a
couple of coins.

After buying a bit of ginger and some chillies, the Ustad
decided to get a few tindas.

‘Mind that you give me small ones.’

‘Yes, yes, that’s what I’m doing.’

‘And these tomatoes - they are soft.’

‘Soft, Sir?’

‘Yes, look -‘ The Ustad took them off the scales. ‘Weigh these
ones instead.’ He rummaged around among the selection.

‘They wouldn’t have gone soft in a week - but whatever you
say, Sir.’

‘Weigh them properly,’ growled the Ustad. ‘If you keep
putting weights on one pan, I can keep putting tomatoes on the
other. My pan should sink in the balance.’

Suddenly, the Ustad’s attention was caught by a couple of
cauliflowers which looked comparatively fresh, not like the
stunted outriders of the season. But when the vegetable seller
named the price, he was appalled.

‘Don’t you fear God ?’

‘For you, Sir, I have quoted a special price.’

497’What do you mean, for me? It’s what you charge
everyone, you rogue, I am certain. Special price -‘

‘Ah, but these cauliflowers are special - you don’t require oil
to fry them.’

Ishaq smiled slightly, but Ustad Majeed Khan simply said to
the local wit :

‘Huh ! Give me this one.’

Ishaq said : ‘Let me carry them, Ustad Sahib.’

Ustad Majeed Khan gave Ishaq the bag of vegetables to carry,
forgetful of his hands. On the way home he did not say
anything. Ishaq walked along quietly.

At his door, Ustad Majeed Khan said in a loud voice: ‘There is
someone with me.’ There was a sound of flustered female
voices and then of people leaving the front room. They
entered. The tanpura was in a corner. Ustad Majeed Khan told
Ishaq to put the vegetables down and to wait for him. Ishaq
remained standing, but looked about him. The room was full
of cheap knick-knacks and tasteless furniture. There could not
have been a greater contrast to Saeeda Bai’s immaculate outer
chamber.

Ustad Majeed Khan came back in, having washed his face and
hands. He told Ishaq to sit down, and tuned the tanpura for a
while. Finally, satisfied, he started to practise in Raag Todi.

There was no tabla player, and Ustad Majeed Khan began to
sense his way around the raag in a freer, less rhythmic but
more intense manner than Ishaq Khan had ever heard from
him before. He always began his public performances not with
a free alaap such as this but with a very slow composition in a
long rhythmic cycle which allowed him a liberty that was
almost, but not quite, comparable. The flavour of these few

minutes was so startlingly different from those other great
performances that Ishaq was enraptured. He closed his eyes,
and the room ceased to exist; and then, after a while, himself;
and finally even the singer.

He did not know how long he had been sitting there when he
heard Ustad Majeed Khan saying :

‘Now, you strum it.’

498He opened his eyes. The maestro, sitting bolt upright,
indicated the tanpura that was lying before him.

Ishaq’s hands did not cause him any pain as he turned it
towards himself and began to strum the four wires, tuned
perfectly to the open and hypnotic combination of tonic and
dominant. He assumed that the maestro was going to continue
his practice.

‘Now, sing this after me.’ And the Ustad sang a phrase.

Ishaq Khan was literally dumbstruck.

‘What is taking you so long ?’ asked the Ustad sternly, in the
tone known so well to his students at the Haridas College of
Music.

Ishaq Khan sang the phrase.

The Ustad continued to offer him phrases, at first brief, and
then increasingly long and complex. Ishaq repeated them to
the best of his ability, at first with unmusical hesitancy but
after a while entirely forgetting himself in the surge and ebb of
the music.

‘Sarangi-wallahs are good at copying,’ said the Ustad
thoughtfully. ‘But there is something in you that goes beyond
that.’

So astonished was Ishaq that his hands stopped strumming the
tanpura.

The Ustad was silent for a while. The only sound in the room
was the ticking of a cheap clock. Ustad Majeed Khan looked
at it, as if conscious for the first time of its presence, then
turned his gaze towards Ishaq.

It struck him that possibly, but only just possibly, he may have
found in Ishaq that disciple whom he had looked for now for
years - someone to whom he could pass on his art, someone
who, unlike his own frog-voiced son, loved music with a
passion, who had a grounding in performance, whose voice
was not displeasing, whose sense of pitch and ornament was
exceptional, and who had that additional element of
indefinable expressivity, even when he copied his own
phrases, which was the soul of music. But originality in
composition - did he possess that - or at least the germ of such
originality ? Only time would tell - months, perhaps years, of
time.

499’Come again tomorrow, but at seven in the morning,’ said
the Ustad, dismissing him. Ishaq Khan nodded slowly, then
stood up to leave.

500Part Seven

V.,7.1

LATA saw the envelope on the salver. Arun’s servant had
brought the mail in just before breakfast and laid it on the
dining table. As soon as she saw the letter she took in her
breath sharply. She even glanced around the dining room. No
one else had yet entered. Breakfast was an erratic meal in this
household.

Lata knew Kabir’s handwriting from the note that he had
scribbled to her during the meeting of the Brahmpur Poetry
Society. She had not expected him to write to her, and could
not think how he had obtained her address in Calcutta. She had
not wanted him to write. She did not want to hear from him or
about him. Now that she looked back she saw that she had
been happy before she had met him: anxious about her exams
perhaps, worried about a few small differences she may have
had with her mother or a friend, troubled about this constant
talk of finding a suitable boy for her, but not miserable as she
had been during this so-called holiday so suddenly enforced by
her mother.

There was a paper-knife on the salver. Lata picked it up, then
stood undecided. Her mother might come in at any moment,
and - as she usually did - ask Lata whom the letter was from
and what it said. She put the knife down and picked the letter
up.

Arun entered. He was wearing a red-and-black striped tie over
his starched white shirt, and was carrying his jacket in one
hand and holding the Statesman in the other. He draped the
jacket across the back of his chair, folded the newspaper to
give him convenient access to the crossword, greeted Lata
affectionately, and riffled through the post.

Lata wandered into the small drawing room that adjoined the
dining room, got out a large volume on Egyptian mythology
that no one ever read, and inserted her envelope in it. Then she
returned to the dining room and sat down, humming to herself
in Raag Todi. Arun frowned. Lata stopped. The servant
brought her a fried egg.

503Arun began whistling ‘Three Coins in a Fountain’ to
himself. He had already solved several clues of the crossword
puzzle while in the bathroom, and he filled in a few more at
the breakfast table. Now he opened some of his mail, glanced
through it and said:

‘When is that damned fool going to bring me my bloody egg?
I shall be late.’

He reached out for a piece of toast, and buttered it.

Varun entered. He was wearing the Tom kurta-pyjama that he
had obviously been sleeping in. ‘Good morning. Good
morning,’ he said. He sounded uncertain, almost guilty. Then
he sat down. When Hanif, the servant-cumcook, came in with
Arun’s egg, he ordered his own. He first asked for an omelette,
then decided on a scrambled egg. Meanwhile he took a piece
of toast from the rack and buttered it.

‘You might think of using the butter-knife,’ growled Arun
from the head of the table.

Varun had extracted butter from the butter-dish with his own
knife to butter his toast. He accepted the rebuke in silence.

‘Did you hear me?’

‘Yes, Arun Bhai.’

‘Then you would do well to acknowledge my remark with a
word or at the very ieast a nod.’

‘Yes.’

‘There is a purpose to table manners, you know.’

Varun grimaced. Lata glanced sympathetically in his direction.

‘Not everyone enjoys seeing the butter encrusted with crumbs
from your toast.’

‘All right, all right,’ said Varun, driven to impatience. It was a
feeble protest, and it was dealt with promptly.

Arun put down his knife and fork, looked at him, and waited.

‘All right, Arun Bhai,’ said Varun meekly.

He had been undecided as to whether to have marmalade or
honey, but now decided on marmalade, since negotiating with
the honey spoon was bound to bring reproof down

504on his head. As he spread the marmalade, he looked across
at Lata, and they exchanged smiles. Lata’s was a halfsmile,
very typical of her these days. Varun’s was rather a twisted
smile, as if he was not sure whether to be happy or despairing.
It was the kind of smile that drove his elder brother mad and
convinced him that Varun was a hopeless case. Varun had just
got a Second in his mathematics B.A., and when he told his
family the result, it was with exactly this kind of smile.

Soon after the term was over, instead of getting a job and
contributing to expenses, Varun had, to Arun’s annoyance,
fallen ill. He was still somewhat weak, and started at loud
sounds. Arun told himself that he really had to have a frank
talk with his younger brother in the next week or so about how
the world did not owe one a living, and about what Daddy
would have said had he been alive.

Meenakshi came in with Aparna.

‘Where’s Daadi?’ asked Aparna, looking around the table for
Mrs Rupa Mehra.

‘Grandma will be coming in a moment, Aparna precious,’ said
Meenakshi. ‘She’s probably reciting the Vedas,’ she added
vaguely.

Mrs Rupa Mehra, who recited a chapter or two from the Gita
very early each morning, was in fact dressing.

As she came in, she beamed around the table. But when she
noticed Aparna’s golden chain, which Meenakshi in an
unthinking moment had put around her neck, the smile died on

her lips. Meenakshi was blithely unaware of anything being
the matter, but Aparna asked a few minutes later:

‘Why are you looking so sad, Daadi?’

Mrs Rupa Mehra finished chewing a bite of fried tomatoes on
toast and said: ‘I’m not sad, darling.’

‘Are you angry with me, Daadi?’ said Aparna.

‘No, sweetheart, not with you.’

‘Then with who?’

‘With myself, perhaps,’ said Mrs Rupa Mehra. She did not
look at the medal-melter, but glanced across at Lata, who was
gazing out of the window at the small garden.

505Lata was more than usually quiet this morning, and Mrs
Rupa Mehra told herself that she had to get the silly girl to
snap out of this mood. Well, tomorrow there was a party at the
Chatterjis, and, like it or not, Lata would have to go-

A car horn sounded loudly outside, and Varun flinched.

‘I should fire that bloody driver,’ said Arun. Then he laughed
and added: ‘But he certainly makes me aware when it’s time to
leave for the office. Bye, darling.’ He swallowed a gulp of
coffee and kissed Meenakshi. ‘I’ll send the car back in half an

hour. Bye, Ugly.’ He kissed Aparna and rubbed his cheek
against hers. ‘Bye, Ma. Bye, everyone. Don’t forget, Basil Cox
will be coming for dinner.’

Carrying his jacket over one arm and his briefcase in the other,
he walked, rather, strode out to the little sky-blue Austin
outside. It was never clear until the last moment whether Arun
would take the newspaper with him to the office; it was part of
the general uncertainty of living with him, just as were his
sudden switches from anger to affection to urbanity. Today, to
everyone’s relief, he let the newspaper remain.

Normally Varun and Lata would both have made a grab for it,
and today Varun was disappointed when Lata did not. The
atmosphere had lightened since Arun’s departure. Aparna now
became the focus of attention. Her mother fed her
incompetently, then called for the Toothless Crone to handle
her. Varun read bits of the news to her, and she listened with a
careful pretence at comprehension and interest.

All Lata could think of was when and where, in this household
of two-and-a-half bedrooms and no privacy to speak of, she
would find time and space to read her letter. She was thankful
that she had been able to take possession of what (though Mrs
Rupa Mehra would have disputed this) belonged to her alone.
But as she looked out of the window towards the small,
brilliantly green lawn with its white tracery of spider-lilies, she
thought of its possible contents with a mixture of longing and
foreboding.

506I

7.2

MEANWHILE there was work to be done in preparation for
the evening’s dinner. Basil Cox, who would be coming over
with his wife Patricia, was Arun’s department head at Bentsen
&C Pryce. Hanif was dispatched to Jagubazaar to get two
chickens, a fish, and vegetables, while Meenakshi accompanied by Lata and Mrs Rupa Mehra - went off to New
Market in the car, which had just returned from Arun’s office.

Meenakshi bought her fortnightly stores - her white flour, her
jam and Chivers Marmalade and Lyle’s Golden Syrup and
Anchor Butter and tea and coffee and cheese and clean sugar
(‘Not this dirty ration stuff) - from Baboralley, a couple of
loaves of bread from a shop in Middleton Row (‘The bread
one gets from the market is so awful, Luts’), some salami from
a cold store in Free School Street (‘The salami from Keventers
is dreadfully bland, I’ve decided never to go there again’), and
half a dozen bottles of Beck’s beer from Shaw Brothers. Lata
tagged along everywhere, though Mrs Rupa Mehra refused to
enter either the cold store or the liquor shop. She was
astonished by Meenakshi’s extravagance, and by the
whimsical nature of some of her purchases (‘Oh, Arun is
bound to like that, yes, I’ll take two,’ said Meenakshi
whenever the shopkeeper suggested something that he thought
Madam would appreciate). All the purchases went into a large
basket which a ragged little boy carried on his head and finally
took to the car. Whenever she was accosted by beggars,
Meenakshi looked straight through them.

Lata wanted to visit a bookshop on Park Street, and spent
about fifteen minutes there while Meenakshi chafed
impatiently. When she found that Lata hadn’t in fact bought
anything, she thought it very peculiar. Mrs Rupa Mehra was
content to browse timelessly.

Upon their return home, Meenakshi found her cook in a flap.
He was not sure about the exact proportions for the soufflé,
and as for the hilsa, Meenakshi would have to instruct him
about the kind of fire it needed to be smoked

507on. Aparna too was sulking because of her mother’s
absence. She now threatened to throw a tantrum. This was too
much for Meenakshi, who was getting late for the canasta
which she played with her ladies’ club - the Shady Ladies once a week, and which (Basil Cox or no Basil Cox) she could
not possibly miss. She got into a flap herself and shouted at
Aparna and the Toothless Crone and the cook. Varun locked
himself in his small room and covered his head with a pillow.

‘You should not get into a temper for nothing,’ said Mrs Rupa
Mehra unhelpfully.

Meenakshi turned towards her in exasperation. ‘That’s a big
help, Ma,’ she said. ‘What do you expect me to do ? Miss my
canasta ?’

‘No, no, you will not miss your canasta,’ said Mrs Rupa
Mehra. ‘That I am not asking you to do, Meenakshi, but you
must not shout at Aparna like that. It is not good for her.’
Hearing this, Aparna edged towards her grandmother’s chair.

Meenakshi made an impatient sound.

The impossibility of her position suddenly came home to her.
This cook was a real incompetent. Arun would be terribly,
terribly angry with her if anything went wrong this evening. It
was so important for his job too - and what could she do ? Cut
out the smoked hilsa ? At least this idiot Hanif could handle

the roast chicken. But he was a temperamental fellow, and had
been known even to misfry an egg. Meenakshi looked around
the room in wild distress.

‘Ask your mother if you can borrow her Mugh cook,’ said
Lata with sudden inspiration.

Meenakshi gazed at Lata in wonder. ‘What an Einstein you
are, Luts!’ she said, and immediately telephoned her mother.
Mrs Chatterji rallied to her daughter’s aid. She had two cooks,
one for Bengali and one for western food. The Bengali cook
was told that he would have to prepare dinner in the Chatterji
household that evening, and the Mugh cook, who came from
Chittagong and excelled in European food, was dispatched to
Sunny Park within the

508half-hour. Meanwhile, Meenakshi had gone off for her
canasta lunch with the Shady Ladies and had almost forgotten
the tribulations of existence.

She returned in the middle of the afternoon to find a rebellion
on her hands. The gramophone was blaring and the chickens
were cackling in alarm. The Mugh cook told her as snootily as
he could that he was not accustomed to being farmed out in
this manner, that he was not used to working in such a small
kitchen, that her cook-cum-bearer had behaved insolently
towards him, that the fish and chickens that had been bought
were none too fresh, and that he needed a certain kind of
lemon extract for the soufflé which she had not had the
foresight to provide. Hanif for his part was glaring resentfully,
and was on the verge of giving notice. He was holding a
squawking chicken out in front of him and saying: ‘Feel, feel
its breast - Memsahib - this is a young and fresh chicken. Why
should I work below this man ? Who is he to boss me around

in my own kitchen ? He keeps saying, “I am Mr Justice
Chatterji’s cook. I am Mr Justice Chatterji’s cook.” ‘

‘No, no, I trust you, I don’t need to -‘ cried Meenakshi,
shuddering fastidiously and drawing back her red-polished
fingernails as her cook pushed the chicken’s feathers aside and
offered its breast for her to assay.

Mrs Rupa Mehra, while not displeased at Meenakshi’s
discomfiture, did not want to jeopardize this dinner for the
boss of her darling son. She was good at making peace
between refractory servants, and she now did so. Harmony
was restored, and she went into the drawing room to play a
game of patience.

Varun had put on the gramophone about half an hour earlier
and was playing the same scratchy yS-rpm record again and
again: the Hindi film song ‘Two intoxicating eyes’, a song that
no one, not even the sentimental Mrs Rupa Mehra, could
tolerate after its fifth repetition. Varun had been singing the
words to himself moodily and dreamily before Meenakshi
returned. In her presence Varun stopped singing, but he
continued to rewind the gramophone every few minutes and
hum the song softly to

509himself by way of accompaniment. As he put away the
spent needles one by one in the little compartment that fitted
into the side of the machine, he reflected gloomily on his own
fleeting life and personal uselessness.

Lata took the book on Egyptian mythology down from the
shelf, and was about to go into the garden with it when her
mother said :

‘Where are you going ?’

‘To sit in the garden, Ma.’

‘But it’s so hot, Lata.’

‘I know, Ma, but I can’t read with this music going on.’

Til tell him to turn it off. All this sun is bad for your
complexion. Varun, turn it off.’ She had to repeat her request a
few times before Varun heard what she was saying.

Lata took the book into the bedroom.

‘Lata, sit with me, darling,’ said Mrs Rupa Mehra.

‘Ma, please let me be,’ said Lata.

‘You have been ignoring me for days,’ said Mrs Rupa Mehra.
‘Even when I told you your results, your kiss was halfhearted.’

‘Ma, I have not been ignoring you,’ said Lata.

‘You have, you can’t deny it. I feel it - here.’ Mrs Rupa Mehra
pointed to the region of her heart.

‘All right, Ma, I have been ignoring you. Now please let me
read.’

‘What’s that you’re reading ? Let me see the book.’

Lata replaced it on the shelf, and said: ‘All right, Ma, I won’t
read it, I’ll talk to you. Happy ?’

‘What do you want to talk about, darling?’ asked Mrs Rupa
Mehra sympathetically.

‘I don’t want to talk. You want to talk,’ Lata pointed out.

‘Read your silly book!’ cried Mrs Rupa Mehra in a sudden
temper. ‘I have to do everything in this house, and no one
cares for me. Everything goes wrong and I have to make
peace. I have slaved for you all my life, and you don’t care if I
live or die. Only when I’m burned on the pyre will you realize
my worth.’ The tears started rolling down her cheeks and she
placed a black nine on a red ten.

510Normally Lata would have made some dutiful attempt

to console her mother, but she was so frustrated and

* annoyed by her sudden emotional sleight-of-hand that she

did nothing. After a while, she took the book down from

the shelf again, and walked into the garden.

‘It will rain,’ said Mrs Rupa Mehra, ‘and the book will get
spoiled. You have no sense of the value of money.’

‘Good,’ thought Lata violently. ‘I hope the book and S-Weverything in it - and I too - get washed away.’

7.3

THE small green garden was empty. The part-time mali had
gone. An intelligent-looking crow cawed from a banana tree.
The delicate spider-lilies were in bloom. Lata sat down on the
slatted green wooden bench in the shade of a tall flame-of-theforest tree. Everything was rainwashed and clean, unlike in
Brahmpur where each leaf had looked dusty and each blade of
grass parched.

Lata looked at the envelope with its firm handwriting and
Brahmpur postmark. Her name was followed immediately by
the address ; it was not ‘care of anybody.

She pulled out a hairpin and opened the envelope. The letter
was only a page long. She had expected Kabir’s letter to be
effusive and apologetic. It was not exactly that.

After the address and date it went :

Dearest Lata,

Why should I repeat that I love you ? I don’t see why you
should disbelieve me. I don’t disbelieve you. Please tell me
what the matter is. I don’t want things to end in this way
between us.

I can’t think about anything except you, but I am annoyed that
I should have to say so. I couldn’t and I can’t run off with you
to some earthly paradise, but how could you have expected me
to ? Suppose I had agreed to your crazy plan. I know that you
would then have discovered twenty reasons why it was
impossible to

5“carry it out. But perhaps I should have agreed anyway.
Perhaps you would have felt reassured because I would have
proved how much I cared for you. Well, I don’t care for you so
much that I’m willing to abdicate my intelligence. I don’t even
care for myself that much. I’m not made that way, and I do
think ahead a bit.

Darling Lata, you are so brilliant, why don’t you see things in
perspective ? I love you. You really owe me an apology.

Anyway, congratulations on your exam results. You must be
very pleased - but I am not very surprised. You must not spend
your time sitting on benches and crying in future. Who knows
who might want to rescue you. Perhaps whenever you’re
tempted to do so, you can think of me returning to the pavilion
and crying every time I fail to make a century.

Two days ago I hired a boat and went up the Ganges to the
Barsaat Mahal. But, like Nawab Khushwaqt, I was so much
grieved that my mind was upset, and the place was sordid and
sad. For a long time I could not forget you though all possible

efforts were made. I felt a strong kinship with him even
though my tears did not fall fast and furious into the frangrant
waters.

My father, though he is fairly absent-minded, can see that
there is something the matter with me. Yesterday he said, ‘It’s
not your results, so what is it, Kabir ? I believe it must be a girl
or something.’ I too believe it must be a girl or something.

Well, now that you have my address why don’t you write to
me? I have been unhappy since you left and unable to
concentrate on anything. I knew you couldn’t write to me even
if you wanted to because you didn’t have my address. Well,
now you do. So please do write. Otherwise I’ll know what to
think. And the next time I go to Mr Nowrojee’s place I will
have to read out some stricken verses of my own.

With all my love, my darling Lata,

Yours, Kabir

5ii7.4

FOR a long while Lata sat in a kind of reverie. She did not at
first re-read the letter. She felt a great many emotions, but they
pulled her in conflicting directions. Under ordinary
circumstances the pressure of her feelings might have caused
her to shed a few unselfconscious tears, but there were a
couple of remarks in the letter which made that impossible.
Her first sense was that she had been cheated, cheated out of
something that she had expected. There was no apology in the
letter for the pain that he must have known he had caused her.
There were declarations of love, but they were not as fervent

or untinged with irony as she had thought they would be.
Perhaps she had given Kabir no opportunity to explain himself
at their last meeting, but now that he was writing to her, he
could have explained himself better. He had not addressed
anything seriously, and Lata had above all wanted him to be
serious. For her it had been a matter of life and death.

Nor had he given her much - or any - news of himself, and
Lata longed for it. She wanted to know everything about him including how well he had done in his exams. From his
father’s remark it was probable that he had not done badly, but
that was not the only interpretation of his remark. It might
simply have meant that with the results out, even if he had
merely passed, one area of uncertainty had been closed as a
possible explanation for his downcast - or perhaps merely
unsettled -mood. And how had he obtained her address?
Surely not from Pran and Savita? From Malati perhaps ? But
as far as she knew Kabir did not even know Malati.

He did not want to take any responsiblity for her feelings, that
was clear. If anything it was she who according to him should be the one to apologize. In one sentence he praised her
intelligence, in another he treated her like a dunce. Lata got the
sense that he was trying to jolly her along without making any
commitment to her

513beyond ‘love’. And what was love ?

Even more than their kisses, she remembered the morning
when she had followed him to the cricket field and watched
him practising in the nets. She had been in a trance, she had
been entranced. He had leaned his head back and burst out
laughing at something. His shirt had been open at the collar;
there had been a faint breeze in the bamboos; a couple of
mynas were quarrelling; it had been warm.

She read through the letter once again. Despite his injunction
to her that she should not sit crying on benches, tears gathered
in her eyes. Having finished the letter, she began, hardly
conscious of what she was doing, to read a paragraph of the
book on Egyptian mythology. But the words formed no pattern
in her mind.

She was startled by Varun’s voice, a couple of yards away.

‘You’d better go in, Lata, Ma is getting anxious.’

Lata controlled herself and nodded.

‘What’s the matter ?’ he asked, noticing that she was or had
been - in tears. ‘Have you been quarrelling with her?’

Lata shook her head.

Varun, glancing down at the book, saw the letter, and
immediately understood who it was from.

Til kill him,’ said Varun with timorous ferocity.

‘There’s nothing to kill,’ said Lata, more angrily than sadly.
‘Just don’t tell Ma, please, Varun Bhai. It would drive both of
us crazy.’

7.5

WHEN Arun came back from work that day, he was in
excellent spirits. He had had a productive day, and he sensed
that the evening was going to go off well. Meenakshi, her
domestic crisis resolved, was no longer running around
nervously; indeed, so elegantly collected was shethat Arun
could never have guessed she had been in the least distraught.
After kissing him on the cheek and giving

‘ him the benefit of her tinkly laugh, she went in to change.
Aparna was delighted to see her father and bestowed a few
kisses on him too but was unable to convince him to do a
jigsaw puzzle with her.

Arun thought that Lata looked a bit sulky, but then that was
par for the course with Lata these days. Ma,

•j»# well, Ma, there was no accounting for her moods. She
looked impatient, probably because her tea had not come on
time. Varun was his usual scruffy, shifty self. Why, Arun asked
himself, did his brother have so little spine and initiative and
why did he always dress in tattered kurta-pyjamas that looked
as if they had been slept in? ‘Turn off that bloody noise,’ he
shouted as he entered the drawing room and received the full
power of ‘Two intoxicating eyes’.

Varun, cowed down though he was by Arun and his bullying
sophistication, occasionally raised his head, usually to have it
brutally slashed off. It took time for another head to grow, but
today it happened to have done so. Varun did turn off the
gramophone, but his resentment smouldered. Having been
subject to his brother’s authority since boyhood, he hated it and, in fact, all authority. He had once, in a fit of antiimperialism and xenophobia, scrawled ‘Pig’ on two Bibles at
St George’s School, and had been soundly thrashed for it by

the white headmaster. Arun too had bawled him out after that
incident, using every possible hurtful reference to his pathetic
childhood and past felonies, and Varun had duly flinched. But
even while flinching before his well-built elder brother’s
attack, and expecting to be slapped by him at any moment,
Varun thought to himself: All he knows how to do is to suck
up to the British and crawl in their tracks. Pig! Pig! He must
have looked his thoughts, for he did get the slap he expected.

Arun used to listen to Churchill’s speeches on the radio during
the War and murmur, as he had heard the English murmur,
‘Good old Winnie!’ Churchill loathed Indians

515and made no secret of it, and spoke with contempt of
Gandhi, a far greater man than he could ever aspire to be ; and
Varun regarded Churchill with a visceral hatred.

‘And change out of those crumpled pyjamas. Basil Cox will be
coming within an hour and I don’t want him to think I run a
third-class dharamshala.’

Til change into cleaner ones,’ said Varun sullenly.

‘You will not,’ said Arun. ‘You will change into proper
clothes.’

‘Proper clothes!’ mumbled Varun softly in a mocking tone.

‘What did you say?’ asked Arun slowly and threateningly.

‘Nothing,’ said Varun with a scowl.

‘Please don’t fight like this. It isn’t good for my nerves,’ said
Mrs Rupa Mehra.

‘Ma, you keep out of this,’ said Arun, bluntly. He pointed in
the direction of Varun’s small bedroom - more a store-room
than a bedroom. ‘Now get out and change.’

‘I planned to anyway,’ said Varun, edging out of the door.

‘Bloody fool,’ said Arun to himself. Then, affectionately, he
turned to Lata: ‘So, what’s the matter, why are you looking so
down in the mouth ?’

Lata smiled. ‘I’m fine, Arun Bhai,’ she said. ‘I think I’ll go
and get ready as well.’

Arun went in to change too. About fifteen minutes before
Basil Cox and his wife were due to arrive, he came out to find
everyone except Varun dressed and ready. Meenakshi emerged
from the kitchen where she had been doing some last minute
supervising. The table had been laid for seven with the best
glassware and crockery and cutlery, the flower arrangement
was perfect, the hors-d’oeuvre had been tasted and found to be
fine, the whisky and sherry and Campari and so forth had been
taken out of the cabinet, and Aparna had been put to bed.

‘Where is he now ?’ demanded Arun of the three women.

‘He hasn’t come out. He must be in his room,’ said Mrs Rupa
Mehra. ‘I do wish you wouldn’t shout at him.’

516I

I

‘He should learn how to behave in a civilized household. This
isn’t some dhoti-wallah’s establishment. Proper clothes
indeed!’

Varun emerged a few minutes later. He was wearing a clean
kurta-pyjama, not Tom exactly, but with a button missing. He
had shaved in a rudimentary sort of way after his bath. He
reckoned he looked presentable.

Arun did not reckon so. His face reddened. Varun noticed it
reddening, and - though he was scared - he was quite pleased
as well.

For a second Arun was so furious he could hardly speak. Then
he exploded.

‘You bloody idiot!’ he roared. ‘Do you want to embarrass us
all ?’

Varun looked at him shiftily. ‘What’s embarrassing about
Indian clothes ?’ he asked. ‘Can’t I wear what I want to? Ma
and Lata and Meenakshi Bhabhi wear saris, not dresses. Or do
I have to keep imitating the whiteys even in my own house ? I
don’t think it’s a good idea.’

‘I don’t care what you bloody well think. In my house you will
do as I tell you. Now you change into shirt and tie - or - or -‘

‘Or else what, Arun Bhai?’ said Varun, cheeking his brother
and enjoying his rage. ‘You won’t give me dinner with your
Colin Box? Actually, I’d much rather have dinner with my
own friends anyway than bow and scrape before this boxwallah and his box-walli.’

‘Meenakshi, tell Hanif to remove one place,’ said Arun.

Meenakshi looked undecided.

‘Did you hear me ?’ asked Arun in a dangerous voice.

Meenakshi got up to do his bidding.

‘Now get out,’ shouted Arun. ‘Go and have dinner with your
Shamshu-drinking friends. And don’t let me see you anywhere
near this house for the rest of the evening. And let me tell you
here and now that I won’t put up with this sort of thing from
you at all. If you live in this house, you bloody well abide by
its rules.’

Varun looked uncertainly towards his mother for support.

Si?‘Darling, please do what he says. You look so much nicer
in a shirt and trousers. Besides, that button is missing. These
foreigners don’t understand. He’s Arun’s boss, we must make
a good impression.’

‘He, for one, is incapable of making a good impression, no
matter what he wears or does.’ Arun put the boot in. ‘I don’t
want him putting Basil Cox’s back up, and he’s perfectly
capable of doing so. Now, Ma, will you stop these waterworks ? See - you’ve upset everyone, you blithering fool,’ said
Arun, turning on Varun again.

But Varun had slipped out already.

7.6

ALTHOUGH Arun was feeling more venomous than calm, he
smiled a brave, morale-building smile and even put his arm
around his mother’s shoulder. Meenakshi reflected that the
seating around the oval table looked a little more symmetrical
now, though there would be an even greater imbalance
between men and women. Still, it was not as if any other
guests had been invited. It was just the Coxes and the family.

Basil Cox and his wife arrived punctually, and Meenakshi
made small talk, interspersing comments about the •weathei
(‘so su\try, so unbearabVy dose it’s been these last few days,
but then, this is Calcutta -‘) with her chiming laugh. She asked
for a sherry and sipped it with a distant look in her eyes. The
cigarettes were passed around ; she lit up, and so did Arun and
Basil Cox.

Basil Cox was in his late thirties, pink, shrewd, sound, and
bespectacled. Patricia Cox was a small, dull sort of woman, a
great contrast to the glamorous Meenakshi. She did not smoke.
She drank quite rapidly however, and with a sort of
desperation. She did not find Calcutta company interesting,
and if there was anything she disliked more than large parties

it was small ones, where she felt trapped into compulsory
sociability.

Lata had a small sherry. Mrs Rupa Mehra had a nimbu pani.

5i8Hanif, looking very smart in his starched white uniform,
offered around the tray of hors-d’oeuvre: bits of salami and
cheese and asparagus on small squares of bread. If the guests
had not so obviously been sahibs - office guests - he might
have allowed his disgruntlement with the turn of affairs in his
kitchen to be more apparent. As it was, he was at his obliging
best.

Arun had begun to hold forth with his usual savoir-faire and
charm on various subjects: recent plays in London, books that
had just appeared and were considered to be significant, the
Persian oil crisis, the Korean conflict. The Reds were being
pushed back, and not a moment too soon, in Arun’s opinion,
though of course the Americans, idiots that they were, would
probably not make use of their tactical advantage. But then
again, with this as with other matters, what could one do ?

This Arun - affable, genial, engaging and knowledgeable, even
(at times) diffident - was a very different creature from the
domestic tyrant and bully of half an hour ago. Basil Cox was
charmed. Arun was good at his work, but Cox had not
imagined that he was so widely read, indeed better read than
most Englishmen of his acquaintance.

Patricia Cox talked to Meenakshi about her little pearshaped
earrings. ‘Very pretty,’ she commented. ‘Where did you get
them made ?’

Meenakshi told her and promised to take her to the shop. She
cast a glance in Mrs Rupa Mehra’s direction, but noticed to her
relief that she was listening, rapt, to Arun and Basil Cox. In
her bedroom earlier this evening, Meenakshi had paused for a
second before putting them on - but then she had said to
herself: Well, sooner or later Ma will have to get used to the
facts of life. I can’t always tread softly around her feelings.

Dinner passed smoothly. It was a full four-course meal: soup,
smoked hilsa, roast chicken, lemon soufflé. Basil Cox tried to
bring Lata and Mrs Rupa Mehra into the conversation, but
they tended to speak only when spoken to. Lata’s mind was far
away. She was brought back with

519a start when she heard Meenakshi describing how the hilsa
was smoked.

‘It’s a wonderful old recipe that’s been in our family for ages,’
said Meenakshi. ‘It’s smoked in a basket over a coal fire after
it’s been carefully de-boned, and hilsa is absolute hell to debone.’

‘It’s delicious, my dear,’ said Basil Cox.

‘Of course, the real secret,’ continued Meenakshi
knowledgeably - though she had only discovered this
afternoon how it was done, and that too because the Mugh
cook had insisted on the correct ingredients being supplied to
him ‘the real secret is in the fire. We throw puffed rice on it
and crude brown sugar or jaggery - what we in this country
call “gur” -‘ (She rhymed it with ‘fur’.)

As she prattled on and on Lata looked at her wonderingly.

‘Of course, every girl in the family learns these things at an
early age.’

For the first time Patricia Cox looked less than cornpletely
bored.

But by the time the soufflé came around, she had lapsed into
passivity.

After dinner, coffee and liqueur, Arun brought out the cigars.
He and Basil Cox talked a little about work. Arun would not
have brought up the subject of the office, but Basil, having
made up his mind that Arun was a thorough gentleman,
wanted his opinion on a colleague. ‘Between us, you know,
and strictly between us, I’ve rather begun to doubt his
soundness,’ he said. Arun passed his finger around the rim of
his liqueur glass, sighed a little, and confirmed his boss’s
opinion, adding a reason or two of his own.

‘Mmm, well, yes, it’s interesting that you should think so too,’
said Basil Cox.

Arun stared contentedly and contemplatively into the grey and
comforting haze around them.

Suddenly the untuneful and slurred notes of ‘Two intoxicating
eyes’ were followed by the fumbling of the key in the front
door. Varun, fortified by Shamshu, the cheap but

52.0effective Chinese spirits that he and his friends could just
about afford, had returned to the fold.

Arun started as if at Banquo’s ghost. He got up, fully intending
to hustle Varun out of the house before he entered the drawing
room. But he was too late.

Varun, tilting a little, and in an exceptional display of
confidence, greeted everyone. The fumes of Shamshu filled
the room. He kissed Mrs Rupa Mehra. She drew back. He
trembled a little when he saw Meenakshi, who was looking
even more dazzlingly beautiful now that she was so horrorstruck. He greeted the guests.

‘Hello, Mr Box, Mrs Box - er, Mrs Box, Mr Box,’ he corrected
himself. He bowed, and fumbled with the button-hole that
corresponded to the missing button. The draw-string of his
pyjamas hung out below his kurta.

‘I don’t believe we’ve met before,’ said Basil Cox, looking
troubled.

‘Oh,’ said Arun, his fair face beet-red with fury and
embarrassment. ‘This is, actually, this is - well, my brother
Varun. He’s a little, er - will you excuse me a minute ?’ He
guided Varun with mildly suppressed violence towards the
door, then towards his room. ‘Not one word!’ he hissed,
looking with fury straight into Varun’s puzzled eyes. ‘Not one
word, or I’ll strangle you with my bare hands.’

He locked Varun’s door from the outside.

He was his charming self by the time he returned to the
drawing room.

‘Well, as I was saying, he’s a little - er, well, uncontrollable at
times. I’m sure you understand. Black sheep and all that.
Perfectly all right, not violent or anything, but -‘

‘It looked as if he’d been on a binge,’ said Patricia Cox,
suddenly livening up.

‘Sent to try us, I’m afraid,’ continued Arun. ‘My father’s early
death and so on. Every family has one. Has his quirks : insists
on wearing those ridiculous clothes.’

‘Very strong, whatever it was. I can still smell it,’ said Patricia.
‘Unusual too. Is it a kind of whisky ? I’d like to try it. Do you
know what it is ?’

‘I’m afraid it’s what’s known as Shamshu.’

52.1’Shamshu?’ said Mrs Cox with the liveliest interest, trying
the word out on her tongue three or four times. ‘Shamshu. Do
you know what that is, Basil?’ She looked alive again. All her
mousiness had disappeared.

‘I don’t believe I do, my dear,’ said her husband.

‘I believe it’s made from rice,’ said Arun. ‘It’s a Chinese
concoction of some kind.’

‘Would Shaw Brothers carry it ?’ asked Patricia Cox.

‘I rather doubt it. It ought to be available in Chinatown,’ said
Arun.

In fact Varun and his friends did get it from Chinatown, from a
hole-in-the-wall sort of place at eight annas a glass.

‘It must be powerful stuff, whatever it is. Smoked hilsa and
Shamshu - how marvellous to learn two entirely different
things at dinner. One never does, you know,’ Patricia confided.
‘Usually, I’m bored as a fish.’

Bored as a fish ? thought Arun. But by now Varun had started
singing to himself inside his room.

‘What a very interesting young man,’ continued Patricia Cox.
‘And he’s your brother, you say. What is he singing ? Why
didn’t he join us for dinner ? We must have all of you around
sometime soon. Mustn’t we, darling?’ Basil Cox looked very
severely doubtful. Patricia Cox decided to take this for assent.
‘I haven’t had so much fun since I was at RAD A. And you
can bring a bottle of Shamshu.’

Heaven forbid, thought Basil Cox.

Heaven forbid, thought Arun.

7.7

THE guests were about to arrive at Mr Justice Chatterji’s
house in Ballygunge. This was one of the three or four grand
parties that he took it upon himself to give at short notice
during the course of the year. There was a peculiar mixture of
guests for two reasons. First, because of Mr Justice Chatterji
himself, whose net of friendship and acquaintance was very
varied. (He was an absent-minded

52.2.man, who picked up friends here and there.) Secondly,
because any party of this kind was invariably treated by the
whole Chatterji family as an opportunity to invite all their own
friends as well. Mrs Chatterji invited some of hers, and so did
their children; only Tapan, who had returned for his school
holidays, was considered too young to tag on his own list of
invitees to a party where there would be drinking.

Mr Justice Chatterji was not an orderly man, but he had
produced five children in strict alternation of sex: Amit,
Meenakshi (who was married to Arun Mehra), Dipankar,
Kakoli, and Tapan. None of them worked, but each had an
occupation. Amit wrote poetry, Meenakshi played canasta,
Dipankar sought the Meaning of Life, Kakoli kept the
telephone busy, and Tapan, who was only twelve or thirteen,
and by far the youngest, went to the prestigious boardingschool, Jheel.

Amit, the poet, had studied Jurisprudence at Oxford, but
having got his degree, had not completed, to his father’s
exasperation, what should have been easy enough for him to
complete: his studies for the Bar at Lincoln’s Inn, his father’s
old Inn. He had eaten most of his dinners and had even passed
a paper or two, but had then lost interest in the law. Instead, on
the strength of a couple of university prizes for poetry, some
short fiction published here and there in literary magazines,
and a book of poetry which had won him a prize in England

(and therefore adulation in Calcutta) he was sitting pretty in
his father’s house and doing nothing that counted as real work.

At the moment he was talking to his two sisters and to Lata.

‘How many do we expect ?’ asked Amit.

‘I don’t know,’ said Kakoli. ‘Fifty?’

Amit looked amused. ‘Fifty would just about cover half your
friends, Kuku. I’d say one hundred and fifty.’

‘I can’t abide these large parties,’ said Meenakshi in high
excitement.

‘No, nor can I,’ said Kakoli, glancing at herself in the tall
mirror in the hall.

52.3’I suppose the guest-list consists entirely of those invited
by Ma and Tapan and myself,’ said Amit, naming the three
least sociable members of the family.

‘Vereeeee funneeeee,’ said (or, rather, sang) Kakoli, whose
name implied the songbird that she was.

‘You should go up to your room, Amit,’ said Meenakshi, ‘and
settle down on a sofa with Jane Austen. We’ll tell you when
dinner is served. Or better still, we’ll send it up to you. That
way you can avoid all your admirers.’

‘He’s very peculiar,’ said Kakoli to Lata. ‘Jane Austen is the
only woman in his life.’

‘But half the bhadralok in Calcutta want him as a match for
their daughters,’ added Meenakshi. ‘They believe he has
brains.’

Kakoli recited :

‘Amit Chatterji, what a catch ! Is a highly suitable match.’

Meenakshi added :

‘Why he has not married yet ? Always playing hard to get.’

KaktAi continued’

‘Famous poet, so they say. “Besh” decent in every way.’

She giggled.

Lata said to Amit : ‘Why do you let them get away with this ?’

‘You mean with their doggerel ?’ said Amit.

‘I mean with teasing you,’ said Lata.

‘Oh, I don’t mind. It runs off my back like duck’s water,’ said
Amit.

Lata looked surprised, but Kakoli said, ‘He’s doing a Biswas
on you.’

‘A Biswas ?’

5M’Biswas Babu, my father’s old clerk. He still comes around
a couple of times a week to help with this and that, and gives
us advice on life. He advised Meenakshi against marrying
your brother,’ said Kakoli.

In fact the opposition to Meenakshi’s sudden affair and
marriage had been wider and deeper. Meenakshi’s parents had
not particularly cared for the fact that she had married outside
the community. Arun Mehra was neither a Brahmo, nor of
Brahmin stock, nor even a Bengali. He came from a family
that was struggling financially. To give the Chatterjis credit,
this last fact did not matter very much to them, though they
themselves had been more than affluent for generations. They
were only (with respect to this objection) concerned that their
daughter might not be able to afford the comforts of life that
she had grown up with. But again, they had not swamped their
married daughter with gifts. Even though Mr Justice Chatterji
did not have an instinctive rapport with his son-in-law, he did
not think that that would be fair.

‘What does Biswas Babu have to do with duck’s water ?’
asked Lata, who found Meenakshi’s family amusing but
confusing.

‘Oh - that’s just one of his expressions. I don’t think it’s very
kind of Amit not to explain family references to outsiders.’

‘She’s not an outsider,’ said Amit. ‘Or she shouldn’t be.
Actually, we are all very fond of Biswas Babu, and he is very
fond of us. He was my grandfather’s clerk originally.’

‘But he won’t be Amit’s - to his heart-deep regret,’ said
Meenakshi. ‘In fact, Biswas Babu is even more upset than our
father that Amit has deserted the Bar.’

‘I can still practise if I choose to,’ said Amit. ‘A university
degree is enough in Calcutta.’

‘Ah, but you won’t be admitted to the Bar Library.’

‘Who cares ?’ said Amit. ‘Actually, I’d be happy editing a
small journal and writing a few good poems and a novel or
two and passing gently into senility and posterity. May I offer
you a drink ? A sherry ?’

Til have a sherry,’ said Kakoli.

52-5’Not you, Kuku, you can help yourself. I was offering
Lata a drink.’

‘Ouch,’ said Kakoli. She looked at Lata’s pale blue cotton sari
with its fine chikan embroidery, and said: ‘Do you know, Lata
- pink is what would really suit you.’

Lata said : ‘I’d better not have anything as dangerous as a
sherry. Could I have some - oh, why not? A small sherry,
please.’

Amit went to the bar with a smile and said: ‘Do you think I
might have two glasses of sherry ?’

‘Dry, medium or sweet, Sir?’ asked Tapan.

Tapan was the baby of the family, whom everyone loved and
fussed over, and who was even allowed an occasional sip of
sherry himself. This evening he was helping at the bar.

‘One sweet and one dry, please,’ said Amit. ‘Where’s
Dipankar?’ he asked Tapan.

‘I think he’s in his room, Amit Da,’ said Tapan. ‘Shall I call
him down ?’

‘No, no, you help with the bar,’ said Amit, patting his brother
on the shoulder. ‘You’re doing a fine job. I’ll just see what he’s
up to.’

Dipankar, their middle brother, was a dreamer. He had studied
economics, but spent most of his time reading about the poet
and patriot Sri Aurobindo, whose flaccid mystical verse he
was (to Amit’s disgust) at present deeply engrossed in.
Dipankar was indecisive by nature. Amit knew that it would
be best simply to bring him downstairs himself. Left to his
own devices, Dipankar treated every decision like a spiritual
crisis. Whether to have one spoon of sugar in his tea or two,
whether to come down now or fifteen minutes later, whether to

enjoy the good life of Ballygunge or to take up Sri
Aurobindo’s path of renunciation, all these decisions caused
him endless agony. A succession of strong women passed
through his life and made most of his decisions for him, before
they became impatient with his vacillation (‘Is she really the
one for me ?’) and moved on. His views moulded themselves
to theirs while they lasted, then began to float freely again.

5z6Dipankar was fond of making remarks such as, ‘It is all the
Void,’ at breakfast, thus casting a mystical aura over the
scrambled eggs.

Amit went up to Dipankar’s room, and found him sitting on a
prayer-mat at the harmonium, untunefully singing a song by
Rabindranath Tagore.

‘You had better come down soon,’ Amit said in Bengali. ‘The
guests have begun to arrive.’

‘Just coming, just coming,’ said Dipankar. Til just finish this
song, and then I’ll… I’ll come down. I will.’

‘I’ll wait,’ said Amit.

‘You can go down, Dada. Don’t trouble yourself. Please.’

‘It’s no trouble,’ said Amit. After Dipankar had finished his
song, unembarrassed by its tunelessness - for all pitches, no
doubt, stood equal before the Void - Amit escorted him down
the teak-balustraded marble stairs.

7.8

‘WHERE’S Cuddles?’ asked Amit when they were halfway
down.

‘Oh,’ said Dipankar vaguely, ‘I don’t know.’

‘He might bite someone.’

‘Yes,’ agreed Dipankar, not greatly troubled by the thought.

Cuddles was not a hospitable dog. He had been with the
Chatterji family for more than ten years, during which time he
had bitten Biswas Babu, several schoolchildren (friends who
had come to play), a number of lawyers (who had visited Mr
Justice Chatterji’s chambers for conferences during his years
as a barrister), a middle-level executive, a doctor on a house
call, and the standard mixture of postmen and electricians.

Cuddles’ most recent victim had been the man who had come
to the door to take the decennial census.

The only creature Cuddles treated with respect was Mr

527Justice Chatterji’s father’s cat Pillow, who lived in the next
house, and who was so fierce that he was taken for walks on a
leash.

‘You should have tied him up,’ said Amit.

Dipankar frowned. His thoughts were with Sri Aurobindo. ‘I
think I have,’ he said.

‘We’d better make sure,’ said Amit. ‘Just in case.’

It was good that they did. Cuddles rarely growled to identify
his position, and Dipankar could not remember where - if at all
- he had put him. He might still be ranging the garden in order
to savage any guests who wandered onto the verandah.

They found Cuddles in the bedroom which had been set aside
for people to leave their bags and other apparatus in. He was
crouched quietly near a bedside table, watching them with
shiny little black eyes. He was a small black dog, with some
white on his chest and on his paws. When they had bought him
the Chatterjis had been told he was an Apso, but he had turned
out to be a mutt with a large proportion of Tibetan terrier.

In order to avoid trouble at the party, he had been fastened by
a leash to a bedpost. Dipankar could not recall having done
this, so it might have been someone else. He and Amit
approached Cuddles. Cuddles normally loved tVie îarriiVy, but
today Vie was jittery.

Cuddles surveyed them closely without growling, and when he
judged that the moment was ripe, he flew intently and
viciously through the air towards them until the sudden
restraint of the leash jerked him back. He strained against it,
but could not get into biting range. All the Chatterjis knew
how to step back rapidly when instinct told them Cuddles was
on the attack. But perhaps the guests would not react so
swiftly.

‘I think we should move him out of this room,’ said Amit.
Strictly speaking, Cuddles was Dipankar’s dog, and thus his
responsibility, but he now in effect belonged to all of them or, rather, was, accepted as one of them, like the sixth point of
a regular hexagon.

‘He seems quite happy here,’ said Dipankar. ‘He’s a

5z8living being too. Naturally he gets nervous with all this
coming and going in the house.’

‘Take it from me,’ said Amit, ‘he’s going to bite someone.’

‘Hmm. … Should I put a notice on the door : Beware of Dog?’
asked Dipankar.

‘No. I think you should get him out of here. Lock him up in
your room.’

‘I can’t do that,’ said Dipankar. ‘He hates being upstairs when
everyone else is downstairs. He is a sort of lapdog, after all.’

Amit reflected that Cuddles was the most psychotic lapdog he
had known. He too blamed his temperament on the constant
stream of visitors to the house. Kakoli’s friends of late had
flooded the Chatterji mansion. Now, as it happened, Kakoli
herself entered the room with a friend.

‘Ah, there you are, Dipankar Da, we were wondering what had
happened to you. Have you met Neera ? Neera, these are my
berruthers Amit and Dipankar. Oh yes, put it down on the
bed,’ said Kakoli. ‘It’ll be quite safe here. And the bathroom’s
through there.’ Cuddles prepared for a lunge. ‘Watch out for
the dog - he’s harmless but sometimes he has moods. We have
moods, don’t we, Cuddlu? Poor Cuddlu, left all alone in the
bedroom.

Darling Cuddles, what to do When the house is such a zoo!’

sang Kakoli, then disappeared.

‘We’d better take him upstairs,’ said Amit. ‘Come on.’
Dipankar consented. Cuddles growled. They calmed him down
and took him up. Then Dipankar played a few soothing chords
on the harmonium to reassure him, and they returned
downstairs.

Many of the guests had arrived by now, and the party was in
full swing. In the grand drawing room with its grand piano and
grander chandelier milled scores of guests in full summer
evening finery, the women fluttering and flattering and sizing
each other up, the men engaging

52.9themselves in more self-important chatter. British and
Indian, Bengali and non-Bengali, old and middle-aged and
young, saris shimmering and necklaces glimmering, crisp
Shantipuri dhotis edged with a fine line of gold and handcreased to perfection, kurtas of raw off-white silk with gold
buttons, chiffon saris of various pastel hues, white cotton saris
with red borders, Dhakai saris with a white background and a
pattern in the weave - or (still more elegant) a grey
background with a white design, white dinner-jackets with

black trousers and black bowties and black patent leather
Derbys or Oxfords (each bearing a little reflected chandelier),
long dresses of flowery-printed fine poplin chintz and finely
polka-dotted white cotton organdy, even an off-the-shoulder
silk dress or two in the lightest and most summery of silks :
brilliant were the clothes, and glittering the people who filled
them.

Arun, who considered it too hot for a jacket, was wearing a
stylish cummerbund instead - a maroon monochrome sash
with a shimmering pattern through the weave - and a matching
bow-tie. He was talking rather gravely to Jock Mackay, a
cheerful bachelor in his mid-forties who was one of the
directors of the managing agency of McKibbin & Ross.

Meenakshi was dressed in a striking orange French chiffon
sari and an electric blue backless choli tied on around her neck
and waist with narrow cloth bands. Her midriff was gloriously
exposed, around her long and fragrant neck was clasped a
Jaipur enamel choker in blue and orange with matching
bracelets on her arms, her already considerable height was
enhanced by stiletto heels and a tall bun, large earrings
dangled deliciously below her chin, the orange tika on her
forehead was as huge as her eyes, and most striking and
ornamental of all was her devastating smile.

She advanced towards Amit, exuding a fragrance of Shocking
Schiaparelli.

But before Amit could greet her, he was accosted by a middleaged, accusing woman with large, popping eyes whom he did
not recognize. She said to him :

53°I

*

f

‘I loved your last book but I can’t say I understood it.’ She
waited for a response.

‘Oh - well, thank you,’ said Amit.

‘Surely that’s not all you’re going to say?’ said the woman,
disappointed. ‘I thought poets were more articulate. I’m an old
friend of your mother’s though we haven’t met for many
years,’ she added, irrelevantly. ‘We go back to Shantiniketan.’

‘Ah, I see,’ said Amit. Although he did not much care for this
woman, he did not move away. He felt he ought to say
something.

‘Well, I’m not so much of a poet now. I’m writing a novel,’ he
said.

‘But that’s no excuse at all,’ said the woman. Then she added :
‘Tell me, what is it about ? Or is that a trade secret of the
famous Amit Chatterji ?’

‘No, no, not really,’ said Amit, who hated to talk about his
current work. ‘It’s about a moneylender at the time of the
Bengal Famine. As you know, my mother’s family comes
from East Bengal -‘

‘How wonderful that you should want to write about your own
country,’ said the woman. ‘Especially after winning all those
prizes abroad. Tell me, are you in India a lot?’

Amit noticed that both his sisters were standing near him now
and listening in.

‘Oh yes, well, now that I’ve returned I am here most of the
time. I’m, well, in and out -‘

‘In and out,’ repeated the woman wonderingly.

‘Back and forth,’ said Meenakshi helpfully.

‘Off and on,’ said Kakoli, who was incapable of restraint.

The woman frowned.

‘To and fro,’ said Meenakshi.

‘Here and there,’ said Kakoli.

She and Meenakshi started giggling. Then they waved to
someone at the far side of the huge room, and instantly
disappeared.

Amit smiled apologetically. But the woman was looking

531at him angrily. Were the young Chatterjis trying to make
fun of her ?

She said to Amit: ‘I am quite sick of reading about you.’

Amit said mildly: ‘Mmm. Yes.’

‘And of hearing about you.’

‘If I weren’t me,’ said Amit, ‘I would be pretty sick of hearing
about myself.’

The woman frowned. Then, recovering, she said: ‘I think my
drink’s finished.’

She noticed her husband hovering nearby, and handed him her
empty glass, which was stained with crimson lipstick around
the rim. ‘But tell me, how do you write ?’

‘Do you mean -‘ began Amit.

‘I mean, is it inspiration ? Or is it hard work ?’

‘Well,’ said Amit, ‘without inspiration one can’t -‘

‘I knew, I just knew it was inspiration. But without being
married, how did you write that poem about the young bride ?’

She sounded disapproving.

Amit looked thoughtful, and said : ‘I just -‘

‘And tell me,’ continued the woman, ‘does it take you long to
think of a book ? I’m dying to read your new book.’

‘So am I,’ said Amit.

‘I have some good ideas for books,’ said the woman. ‘When I
was in Shantiniketan, the influence of Gurudeb on me was
very deep … you know - our own Rabindranath ‘

Amit said, ‘Ah.’

‘It could not take you long, I know … but the writing itself
must be so difficult. I could never be a writer. I don’t have the
gift. It is a gift from God.’

‘Yes, it seems to come -‘

‘I once wrote poetry,’ said the woman. ‘In English, like you.
Though I have an aunt who writes Bengali poetry. She was a
true disciple of Robi Babu. Does your poetry rhyme ?’

‘Yes.’

‘Mine didn’t. It was modern. 1 was young, in Daqeeling.

531I wrote about nature, not about love. I hadn’t met Mihir
then. My husband, you know. Later I typed them. I showed
them to Mihir. Once I spent a night in a hospital bitten by
mosquitoes. And a poem came out suddenly. But he said, “It
doesn’t rhyme.” ‘

She looked disapprovingly at her husband, who was hovering
around like a cupbearer with her refilled glass.

‘Your husband said that ?’ said Amit.

‘Yes. Then I never had the urge again. I don’t know why.’

‘You’ve killed a poet,’ said Amit to her husband, who seemed
a good enough fellow.

‘Come,’ he continued to Lata, who had been listening to the
last part of the conversation, Til introduce you to a few people,
as I promised. Excuse me for a minute.’

Amit had made no such promise, but it enabled him to get
away.

I

7.9

‘WELL, whom do you want to meet ?’ said Amit to Lata.

‘No one,’ said Lata.

‘No one ?’ asked Amit. He looked amused.

‘Anyone. How about that woman there with the redand-white
cotton sari ?’

‘The one with the short grey hair - who looks as if she’s laying
down the law to Dipankar and my grandfather ?’

‘Yes.’

‘That’s lia Chattopadhyay. Dr lia Chattopadhyay. She’s related
to us. She has strong and immediate opinions. You’ll like her.’

Though Lata was unsure about the value of strong and
immediate opinions, she liked the look of the woman. Dr lia
Chattopadhyay was shaking her finger at Dipankar and saying
something to him with great and apparently affectionate
vigour. Her sari was rather crushed.

‘May we interrupt?’ asked Amit.

533’Of course you may, Amit, don’t be stupid,’ said Dr lia
Chattopadhyay.

‘This is Lata, Arun’s sister.’

‘Good,’ said Dr lia Chattopadhyay, appraising her in a second.
‘I’m sure she’s nicer than her bumptious brother. I was telling
Dipankar that economics is a pointless subject. He would have
done far better to study mathematics. Don’t you agree ?’

‘Of course,’ said Amit.

‘Now that you’re back in India you must stay here
permanently, Amit. Your country needs you - and I don’t say
that lightly.’

‘Of course,’ said Amit.

Dr lia Chattopadhyay said to Lata: ‘I never pay any attention
to Amit, he always agrees with me.’

‘lia Kaki never pays any attention to anyone,“ said Amit.

‘No. And do you know why ? It’s because of your
grandfather.’

‘Because of me ?’ asked the old man.

‘Yes,’ said Dr lia Chattopadhyay. ‘Many years ago you told
me that until you were forty you were very concerned about
what people thought of you. Then you decided to be concerned
about what you thought of other people instead.’

‘Did \ say that? said old Mr Qnatterji, surprised.

‘Yes, indeed, whether you remember it or not. I too used to
make myself miserable bothering about other people’s
opinions, so I decided to adopt your philosophy immediately,
even though I wasn’t forty then - or even thirty. Do you really
not remember that remark of yours? I was trying to decide
whether to give up my career, and was under a lot of pressure
from my husband’s family to do so. My talk with you made all
the difference.’

‘Well,’ said old Mr Chatterji, ‘I remember some things but not
other things these days. But I’m very glad my remark made
such a, such a, well, profound impression on you. Do you
know, the other day I forgot the name of my last cat but one. I
tried to recall it, but it didn’t come to

me.

534T

‘Biplob,’ said Amit.

‘Yes, of course, and it did come back to me eventually. I had
named him that because I was a friend of Subhas Bose - well,
let me say I knew the family. … Of course, in my position as a
judge, a name like that would have to be,er-‘

Amit waited while the old man searched for the right word,
then helped him out.

‘Ironic ?’

‘No, I wasn’t looking for that word, Amit, I was - well,
“ironic” will do. Of course, those were different times, mm,
mm. Do you know, I can’t even draw a map of India now. It
seems so unimaginable. And the law too is changing every
day. One keeps reading about writ petitions being brought up
before the High Courts. Well, in my day we were content with
regular suits. But I’m an old man, things must move ahead,
and I must fall back. Now girls like lia, and young people like
you’ - he gesticulated towards Amit and Lata - ‘must carry
things forward.’

‘I’m hardly a girl,’ said Dr lia Chattopadhyay. ‘My own
daughter is twenty-five now.’

‘For me, dear lia, you will always be a girl,’ said old Mr
Chatterji.

Dr lia Chattopadhyay made an impatient sound. ‘Anyway, my
students don’t treat me like a girl. The other day I was
discussing a chapter in one of my old books with a junior
colleague of mine, a very serious young man, and he said,
“Madam, far be it for me, not only as your junior but also as
one who is appreciative of the situation of the book in the
context of its time and the fact that you have not many years
remaining, to suggest that -” I was quite charmed. Remarks
like that rejuvenate me.’

‘What book was that ?’ asked Lata.

‘It was a book about Donne,’ said Dr lia Chattopadhyay.
‘Metaphysical Causality. It’s a very stupid book.’

‘Oh, so you teach English!’ said Lata, surprised. ‘I thought
you were a doctor - I mean, a medical doctor.’

‘What on earth have you been telling her ?’ said Dr lia
Chattopadhyay to Amit.

535’Nothing. I didn’t really get the chance to introduce you
properly. You were telling Dipankar so forcefully that he
should have dropped economics that I didn’t dare to interrupt.’

‘So I was. And so he should have. But where has he got to?’

Amit scanned the room cursorily, and noticed Dipankar
standing with Kakoli and her babble-rabble. Dipankar, despite
his mystical and religious tendencies, was fond of even foolish
young women.

‘Shall I deliver him back to you ?’ asked Amit.

‘Oh, no,’ said Dr lia Chattopadhyay, ‘arguing with him only
upsets me, it’s like battling a blancmange … all his mushy
ideas about the spiritual roots of India and the genius of
Bengal. Well, if he were a true Bengali, he’d change his name
back to Chattopadhyay - and so would you all, instead of
continuing to cater to the feeble tongues and brains of the
British Where are you studying ?’

Lata, still a little shaken by Dr lia Chattopadhyay’s emphatic
energy, said: ‘Brahmpur.’

‘Oh, Brahmpur,’ said Dr lia Chattopadhyay. ‘An impossible
place. I once was - no, no, I won’t say it, it’s too cruel, and
you’re a nice girl.’

‘Oh, do go on, lia Kaki,’ said Amit. ‘I adore cruelty, and Y in
sui c Lala can lake aiiyi’ifmg y va ‘rurvt tu Tay.’

‘Well, Brahmpur!’ said Dr lia Chattopadhyay, needing no
second bidding. ‘Brahmpur ! I had to go there for a day about
ten years ago to attend some conference or other in the English
Department, and I’d heard so much about Brahmpur and the
Barsaat Mahal and so on that I stayed on for a couple of extra
days. It made me almost ill. All that courtly culture with its
Yes Huzoor and No Huzoor and nothing robust about it at all.
“How are you ?”

“Oh, well, I’m alive.” I just couldn’t stand it. “Yes, I’ll have
two

florets of rice, and one drop of daal “ All that subtlety

and etiquette and bowing and scraping and ghazals and kathak.
Kathak ! When I saw those fat women twirling around like
tops, I wanted to say to them, “Run! Run! don’t dance, run!”’

536v-v„

‘It’s a good thing you didn’t, lia Kaki, you’d have been
strangled.’

‘Well, at least it would have meant an end to my suffering. The
next evening I had to undergo some more of your Brahmpuri
culture. We had to go and listen to one of those ghazal singers.
Dreadful, dreadful, I’ll never forget it ! One of those soulful
women, Saeeda something, whom you couldn’t see for her
jewellery - it was like staring into the sun. Wild horses
wouldn’t drag me there again … and all those brainless men in
that silly northern dress, the pyjama, looking as if they’d just
got out of bed, rolling about in ecstasy - or agony - groaning
“wah! wah!” to the most abjectly self-pitying insipid verse - or
so it seemed to me when my friends translated it. … Do you
like that sort of music ?’

‘Well, I do like classical music,’ began Lata tentatively,
waiting for Dr lia Chattopadhyay to pronounce that she was
completely misguided. ‘Ustad Majeed Khan’s performances of
raags like Darbari, for instance ‘

Amit, without waiting for Lata to finish her sentence, stepped
swiftly in to draw Dr lia Chattopadhyay’s fire.

‘So do I, so do I,’ he said. ‘I’ve always felt that the
performance of a raag resembles a novel - or at least the kind
of novel I’m attempting to write. You know,’ he continued,
extemporizing as Vie went along, ‘first you take one note and
explore it for a while, then another to discover its possibilities,
then perhaps you get to the dominant, and pause for a bit, and
it’s only gradually that the phrases begin to form and the tabla
joins in with the beat … and then the more brilliant
improvisations and diversions begin, with the main theme
returning from time to time, and finally it all speeds up, and
the excitement increases to a climax.’

Dr lia Chattopadhyay was looking at him in astonishment.
‘What utter nonsense,’ she said to Amit. ‘You’re getting to be
as fluffy as Dipankar. Don’t pay any attention to him, Lata,’
continued the author of Metaphysical Causality. ‘He’s just a
writer, he knows nothing at all about literature. Nonsense
always makes me hungry, I must get

537some food at once. At least the family serves dinner at a
sensible hour. “Two florets of rice” indeed!’ And, shaking her
grey locks emphatically, she made for the buffet table.

Amit offered to bring some food on a plate to his grandfather,
and the old man acquiesced. He sat down in a comfortable
armchair, and Amit and Lata went towards the buffet. On the
way, a pretty young woman detached herself from Kakoli’s
giggling, gossiping group, and came up to Amit.

‘Don’t you remember me?’ she asked. ‘We met at the
SarkarsV

Amit, trying to work out when and at which Sarkars’ they
might have met, frowned and smiled simultaneously.

The girl looked at him reproachfully. ‘We had a long
conversation,’ she said.

‘Ah.’

‘About Bankim Babu’s attitude towards the British, and how it
affected the form as opposed to the content of his writing.’

Amit thought : Oh God ! Aloud he said : ‘Yes … yes ‘

Lata, though she felt sorry for both Amit and the girl, could
not help smiling. She was glad she had come to the party after
all.

The girl persisted : ‘Don’t you remember ?’

Amit suddenly became voluble. ‘I am so forgetful -‘ he said; ‘and forgettable,’ he added quickly, ‘that I sometimes wonder if
I ever existed. Nothing I’ve ever done seems to have
happened….’

The girl nodded. ‘I know just what you mean,’ she said. But
she soon wandered away a little sadly.

Amit frowned.

Lata, who could tell that he was feeling bad for having made
the girl feel bad, said :

‘Your responsibilities don’t end with having written your
books, it seems.’

‘What?’ said Amit, as if noticing her for the first time. ‘Oh
yes, oh yes, that’s certainly true. Here, Lata. Have a plate.’

5387.10

ALTHOUGH Amit was not too conscientious about his
general duties as a host, he tried to make sure that Lata at least
was not left stranded during the evening. Varun (who might
otherwise have kept her company) had not come to the party;
he preferred his Shamshu friends. Meenakshi (who was fond
of Lata and normally would have escorted her around) was
talking to her parents during a brief respite in their hostly
duties, describing the events in the kitchen yesterday afternoon
with the Mugh cook and in the drawing room yesterday
evening with the Coxes. She had had the Coxes invited this
evening as well because she thought it might be good for
Arun.

‘But she’s a drab little thing,’ said Meenakshi. ‘Her clothes
look as if they’ve been bought off the hook.’

‘She didn’t look all that drab when she introduced herself,’
said her father.

Meenakshi looked around the room casually and started
slightly. Patricia Cox was wearing a beautiful green silk dress
with a pearl necklace. Her gold-brown hair was short and,
under the light of the chandelier, curiously radiant. This was
not the mousy Patricia Cox of yesterday. Meenakshi’s
expression was not ecstatic.

‘I hope things are well with you, Meenakshi,’ said Mrs
Chatterji, reverting for a moment to Bengali.

‘Wonderfully well, Mago,’ replied Meenakshi in English. ‘I’m
so much in love.’

This brought an anxious frown to Mrs Chatterji’s face.

‘We’re so worried about Kakoli, she said.

‘We?’ said Mr Justice Chatterji. ‘Well, I suppose that’s right.’

‘Your father doesn’t take things seriously enough. First it was
that boy at Calcutta University, the, you know, the-‘

‘The commie,’ said Mr Justice Chatterji benevolently.

‘Then it was the boy with the deformed hand and the strange
sense of humour, what was his name ?’

539’Tapan.’

‘Yes, what an unfortunate coincidence.’ Mrs Chatterji glanced
at the bar where her own Tapan was still on duty. Poor baby.
She must tell him to go to bed soon. Had he had time to snatch
a bite to eat ?

‘And now ?’ asked Meenakshi, looking over at the corner
where Kakoli and her friends were nattering and chattering
away.

‘Now,’ said her mother, ‘it’s a foreigner. Well, I may as well
tell you, it’s that German fellow there.’

‘He’s very good-looking,’ said Meenakshi, who noticed
important things first. ‘Why hasn’t Kakoli told me ?’

‘She’s quite secretive these days,’ said her mother.

‘On the contrary, she’s very open,’ said Mr Justice Chatterji.

‘It’s the same thing,’ said Mrs Chatterji. ‘We hear about so
many friends and special friends that we never really know
who the real one is. If indeed there is one at all.’

‘Well, dear,’ said Mr Justice Chatterji to his wife, ‘you worried
about the commie and that came to nothing, and about the boy
with the hand, and that came to nothing. So why worry? Look
at Arun’s mother there, she’s always smiling, she never
worries about anything.’

°BaDa,“ saia Meenakshi, “

“that’s simp’iy not true, s’ne’ s t’ne biggest worrier of all. She
worries about everything - no matter how trivial.’

‘Is that so ?’ said her father with interest.

‘Anyway,’ continued Meenakshi, ‘how do you know that there
is any romantic interest between them ?’

‘He keeps inviting her to all these diplomatic functions,’ said
her mother. ‘He’s a Second Secretary at the German Consulate

General. He even pretends to like Rabindrasangeet. It’s too
much.’

‘Darling, you’re not being quite fair,’ said Mr Justice Chatterji.
‘Kakoli too has suddenly evinced an interest in playing the
piano parts of Schubert songs. If we’re lucky, we may even
hear an impromptu recital tonight.’

‘She says he has a lovely baritone voice, and it makes

540^R%

her swoon. She will completely ruin her reputation,’ said Mrs
Chatterji.

‘What’s his name ?’ asked Meenakshi.

‘Hans,’ said Mrs Chatterji.

‘Just Hans ?’

‘Hans something. Really, Meenakshi, it’s too upsetting. If he’s
not serious, it’ll break her heart. And if she marries him she’ll
leave India and we’ll never see her again.’

‘Hans Sieber,’ said her father. ‘Incidentally, if you introduce
yourself as Mrs Mehra rather than as Miss Chatterji, he is
liable to seize your hand and kiss it. I think his family was
originally Austrian. Courtesy is something of a disease there.’

‘Really ?’ breathed Meenakshi, intrigued.

‘Really. Even lia was charmed. But it didn’t work with your
mother; she considers him a sort of pallid Ravana come to
spirit her daughter away to distant wilds.’

The analogy was not apt, but Mr Justice Chatterji, off the
bench, relaxed considerably the logical rigour he was
renowned for.

‘So you think he might kiss my hand ?’

‘Not might, will. But that’s nothing to what he did with mine.’

‘What did he do, Baba ?’ Meenakshi fixed her huge eyes on
her father.

‘He nearly crushed it to pulp.’ Her father opened his right
hand and looked at it for a few seconds.

‘Why did he do that ?’ asked Meenakshi, laughing in her
tinkling way.

‘I think he wanted to be reassuring,’ said her father. ‘And your
husband was similarly reassured a few minutes later. At any
rate, I noticed him open his mouth slightly when he was
receiving his handshake.’

‘Oh, poor Arun,’ said Meenakshi with unconcern.

She looked across at Hans, who was gazing adoringly at
Kakoli surrounded by her circle of jabberers. Then, to her
mother’s considerable distress, she repeated :

‘He’s very good-looking. Tall too. What’s wrong with him?
Aren’t we Brahmos supposed to be very open-

541minded ? Why shouldn’t we marry Kuku off to a foreigner
? It would be rather chic.’

‘Yes, why not ?’ said her father. ‘His limbs appear to be
intact.’

Mrs Chatterji said: ‘I wish you could dissuade your sister from
acting rashly. I should never have let her learn that brutal
language from that awful Miss Hebel.’

Meenakshi said: ‘I don’t think anything we say to one another
has much effect. Didn’t you want Kuku to dissuade me from
marrying Arun a few years ago ?’

‘Oh, that was quite different,’ said Mrs Chatterji. ‘And
besides, we’re used to Arun now,’ she continued
unconvincingly. ‘We’re all one big happy family now.’

The conversation was interrupted by Mr Kohli, a very round
teacher of physics who was fond of his drink, and was trying
to avoid bumping into his reproving wife on his way to the bar.

‘Hello, judge,’ he said. ‘What do you think of the verdict in
the Bandel Road case ?’

‘Ah, well, as you know, I can’t comment on it,’ said Mr Justice
Chatterji. ‘It might turn up in my court on appeal. And really, I
haven’t been following it closely either, though everyone else I
know appears to have been.’

Mrs Chatterji had no such compunctions, however. All the
newspapers had carried long reports about the progress of the
case and everyone had an opinion about it. ‘It really is
shocking,’ she said. ‘I can’t see how a mere magistrate has the
right -‘

‘A Sessions Judge, my dear,’ interjected Mr Justice Chatterji.

‘Yes, well, I don’t see how he can possibly have the right to
overturn the verdict of a jury. Is that justice? Twelve good men
and true, don’t they say? How dare he set himself up above
them ?’

‘Nine, dear. It’s nine in Calcutta. As for their goodness and
truth -‘

‘Yes, well. And to call the verdict perverse - isn’t that what he
said- ?’

‘Perverse, unreasonable, manifestly wrong and against

542-the weight of the evidence,’ recited the bald-headed Mr
Kohli with a relish he usually reserved for his whisky. His

small mouth was half open, a little like that of a meditative
fish.

‘Perverse, unreasonably wrong and so on, well, does he have a
right to do that? It is so - so undemocratic somehow,’
continued Mrs Chatterji, ‘and, like it or not, we live in
democratic times. And democracy is half our trouble. And
that’s why we have all these disorders and 1 all this bloodshed,
and then we have jury trials - why we still have them in
Calcutta when everyone else in India has got rid of them I
really don’t know - and someone bribes or intimidates the jury,
and they bring in these impossible verdicts. If it weren’t for
courageous judges who set these verdicts aside, where would
we be? Don’t you agree, dear?’ Mrs Chatterji sounded
indignant.

Mr Justice Chatterji said, ‘Yes, dear, of course. Well, there you
are, Mr Kohli; now you know what I think. But your glass is
empty.’

Mr Kohli, bewildered, said, ‘Yes, I think I’ll get another.’ He
looked quickly around to make sure the coast was clear.

‘And please tell Tapan he should go to bed at once,’ said Mrs
Chatterji. ‘Unless he hasn’t eaten. If he hasn’t eaten, he
shouldn’t go to bed at once. He should eat first.’

‘Do you know, Meenakshi,’ said Mr Justice Chatterji, ‘that
your mother and I were arguing with each other so
convincingly one day last week that the next day by breakfast
we had convinced ourselves of each other’s points of view and
argued just as fiercely as before ?’

‘What were you arguing about ?’ said Meenakshi. ‘I miss our
breakfast parliaments.’

‘I can’t remember,’ said Mr Justice Chatterji. ‘Can you ?
Wasn’t it something to do with Biswas Babu ?’

‘It was something to do with Cuddles,’ said Mrs Chatterji.

‘Was it? I’m not sure it was. I thought it was - well,

543anyway, Meenakshi, you must come for breakfast one day
soon. Sunny Park is almost within walking distance of the
house.’

‘I know,’ said Meenakshi. ‘But it’s so difficult to get away in
the morning. Arun is very particular about things being just so,
and Aparna is always so taxing and tedious before eleven.
Mago, your cook really saved my life yesterday. Now I think
I’ll go and say hello to Hans. And who’s that young man
who’s glowering at Hans and Kakoli ? He’s not even wearing a
bow-tie.’

Indeed, the young man was virtually naked: dressed merely in
a standard white shirt and white trousers with a regular striped
tie. He was a college student.

‘I don’t know, dear,’ said Mrs Chatterji.

‘Another mushroom ?’ asked Meenakshi.

Mr Justice Chatterji, who had first coined the phrase when
Kakoli’s friends started springing up in profusion, nodded.
‘I’m sure he is,’ he said.

Halfway across the room, Meenakshi bumped into Amit, and
repeated the question.

‘He introduced himself to me as Krishnan,’ said Amit. ‘Kakoli
knows him very well, it seems.’

‘Oh,’ said Meenakshi. ‘What does he do ?’

‘I don’t know. He’s one of her close friends, he says.’

‘One of her closest friends ?’

‘Oh no,’ said Amit. ‘He couldn’t be one of her closest friends.
She knows the names of those.’

‘Well, I’m going to meet Kuku’s Kraut,’ said Meenakshi with
decision. ‘Where’s Luts? She was with you a few minutes
ago.’

‘I don’t know. Somewhere there.’ Amit pointed in the
direction of the piano, to a dense and voluble section of the
crowd. ‘By the way, watch your hands when watching Hans.’

‘Yes, I know,’ said Meenakshi. ‘Daddy warned me too. But it’s
a safe moment. He’s eating. Surely he won’t set down his plate

to seize my hand ?’

‘You can never tell,’ said Amit darkly.

‘Too delicious,’ said Meenakshi.

5447.11

MEANWHILE Lata, who was in the thickest part of the party,
felt as if she was swimming in a sea of language. She was
quite amazed by the glitter and glory of it all. Sometimes a
half-comprehensible English wave would rise, sometimes an
incomprehensible Bengali one. Like magpies cackling over
baubles - or discovering occasional gems and imagining them
to be baubles - the excited guests chattered ! on. Despite the
fact that they were shovelling in a great deal of food, everyone
managed to shovel out a great many words.

‘Oh, no, no, Dipankar … you don’t understand - the
fundamental construct of Indian civilization is the Square the
four stages of life, the four purposes of life - love, wealth,
duty, and final liberation - even the four arms of our ancient
symbol, the swastika, so sadly abused of late … yes, it is the
square and the square alone that is the fundamental construct
of our spirituality … you will only understand this when you
are an old lady like me ‘

‘She keeps two cooks, that is the reason, no other. Truly - but
you must try the luchis. No, no, you must have everything in
the right order … that is the secret of Bengali food ‘

‘Such a good speaker at the Ramakrishna Mission the other
day ; quite a young man but so spiritual … Creativity in an
Age of Crisis … you really must go next week : he will be
talking about the Quest for Peace and Harmony ‘

‘Everyone said that if I went down to the Sundarbans I’d see
scores of tigers. I didn’t even see a mosquito. Water, water
everywhere - and nothing else at all. People are such dreadful
liars.’

‘They should be expelled - stiff exam or no stiff exam, is that a
reason for snatching papers in the examination hall ? These are
commerce students of Calcutta University, mind you. What
will happen to the economic order without discipline ? If Sir
Asutosh were alive today what would he say ? Is this what
Independence means ?’

545’Montoo is looking so sweet. But Poltoo and Loltoo are
looking a little under par. Ever since their father’s illness, of
course. They say it is - that it is, you know … well, liver …
from too much drink.’

‘Oh, no, no, no, Dipankar - the elemental paradigm - I would
never have said construct - of our ancient civilization is of
course the Trinity … I don’t mean the Christian trinity, of
course ; all that seems so crude somehow - but the Trinity as
Process and Aspect - Creation and Preservation and
Destruction - yes, the Trinity, that is the elemental paradigm of
our civilization, and no other ‘

‘Ridiculous nonsense, of course. So I called the union leaders
in and I read them the riot act. Naturally it took a little straight
talk for them to come into line again. Well, I won’t say there

wasn’t a payment to one or two of the most recalcitrant of
them, but all that is handled by Personnel.’

‘That’s not Je reviens - that’s Quelque-fleurs - all the
difference in the world. Not that my husband would know the
difference. He can’t even recognize Chanel!’

‘Then I said to Robi Babu: “You are like a God to us, please
give me a name for my child,” and he consented. That is the
reason why she is called Hemangini Actually, the name was
not to my liking, but what could I do ?’

‘If the mullahs want war, they can have one. Our trade with
East Pakistan has virtually come to a halt. Well, one happy
side-effect is that the price of mangoes has come down! The
Maldah growers had a huge crop this year, and they don’t
know what to do with them. … Of course it’s a transport
problem too, just like the Bengal Famine.’

‘Oh, no, no, no, Dipankar, you haven’t got it at all - the
primeval texture of Indian philosophy is that of Duality …

yes, Duality The warp and weft of our ancient garment,

the sari itself - a single length of cloth which yet swathes our
Indian womanhood - the warp and weft of the universe itself,
the tension between Being and Non-being - yes, indubitably it
is Duality alone that reigns over us here in our ancient land.’

546’I felt like crying when I read the poem. They must be so
proud of him. So proud.’

‘Hello, Arun, where’s Meenakshi ?’

Lata turned around and saw Arun’s rather displeased
expression. It was his friend Billy Irani. This was the third
time someone had spoken to him with the sole intention of
finding out where his wife was. He looked around the room
for her orange sari, and spied her near the Kakoli crowd.

‘There she is, Billy, near Kuku’s nest. If you want to meet her,
I’ll walk over with you and detach her,’ he said.

Lata wondered for a second what her friend Malati would have
made of all this. She attached herself to Arun as if to a liferaft, and floated across to where Kakoli was standing.
Somehow or other Mrs Rupa Mehra, as well as an old
Marwari gentleman clad in a dhoti, had infiltrated the crowd of
bright young things.

The old gentleman, unconscious of the gilded youth
surrounding him, was saying, rather fussily, to Hans :

‘Ever since the year 1933 I have been drinking the juice of
bitter gourds. You know bitter gourd ? It is our famous Indian
vegetable, called karela. It looks like this’ - he gesticulated
elongatedly - ‘and it is green, and ribbed.’

Hans looked mystified. His informant continued :

‘Every week my servant takes a seer of bitter gourd, and from
the skin only, mark you, he will make juice. Each seer will

yield one jam jar of juice.’ His eyes squinted in concentration.
‘What they do with the rest I do not care.’

He made a dismissive gesture.

‘Yes ?’ said Hans politely. ‘That makes me so interested.’

Kakoli had begun to giggle. Mrs Rupa Mehra was looking
deeply interested. Arun caught Meenakshi’s eye and frowned.
Bloody Marwari, he was thinking. Trust them to make a fool
of themselves in front of foreigners.

Sweetly oblivious of Arun’s disapproval, the gourd-proponent
continued :

‘Then every morning for my breakfast he will give me one
sherry glass or liqueur glass - so much - of this juice. Every
day since 1933. And I have no sugar problems. I can

547eat sweetmeats without anxiety. My dermatology is also
very good, and all bowel movements are very satisfactory.’

As if to prove the point he bit into a gulab-jamun which was
dripping with syrup.

Mrs Rupa Mehra, fascinated, said: ‘Only the skin?’ If this was
true, diabetes need no longer interpose itself between her
palate and her desires.

‘Yes,’ said the man fastidiously. ‘Only the skin, like I have
said. The rest is a superfluity. Beauty of bitter gourd is only
skin deep.’

7.12

‘ENJOYING yourself?’ Jock Mackay asked Basil Cox as they
wandered out onto the verandah.

‘Well, yes, rather,’ said Basil Cox, resting his whisky
precariously on the white cast-iron railing. He felt lightheaded,
almost as if he wanted to balance on the railings himself. The
fragrance of gardenias wafted across the lawn.

‘First time I’ve seen you at the Chatterjis. Patricia’s looking
ravishing.’

‘Thanks … she is, isn’t she ? I can never predict when sb/t’s
“guvwi 1» tjT.nt IL -gCAvi ViTwt. tk yetti kwew, -«Wri \ Wd
to come out to India, she was most unwilling. She even, well.

Basil, moving his thumb gently across his lower lip, looked
out into the garden, where a few mellow golden globes lit up
the underside of a huge laburnum tree covered with grape-like
clusters of yellow flowers. There appeared to be a hut of sorts
under the tree.

‘But you’re enjoying it here, are you ?’

‘I suppose so Puzzling sort of place, though Of

course, I’ve been here less than a year.’

‘What do you mean ?’

‘Well, what’s that bird for instance that was singing a moment
ago - pu-puuuuuu-pu ! pu-puuuuu-pu ! higher and higher. It
certainly isn’t a cuckoo and I rather wish it was.*

Disconcerting. And I find all these lakhs and crores and annas
and pice quite confusing still. I have to re-calculate things in
my head. I suppose I’ll get used to it all with time.’ From the
expression on Basil Cox’s face it didn’t look likely. Twelve
pence to the shilling and twenty shillings to the pound was
infinitely more logical than four pice to the anna and sixteen
annas to the rupee.

‘Well, it is a cuckoo, as a matter of fact,’ said Jock Mackay,
‘it’s the hawk-cuckoo - or brainfever bird … didn’t you know
that ? It’s hard to believe, but I’ve got so used to it that I miss
it when I’m back home on leave. The song of the birds I don’t
mind at all, what I can’t abide is the dreadful music Indian
singers make … awful wailing stuff. … But do you know the
question that disconcerted me most of all when I first came
here twenty years ago and saw all these beautiful, elegantly
dressed women ?’ Jock Mackay cheerfully and confidingly
jerked his head towards the drawing room. ‘How do you fuck
in a sari ?’

Basil Cox made a sudden movement, and his drink fell over
into a flowerbed. Jock Mackay looked faintly amused.

‘Well,’ said Basil Cox, rather annoyed, ‘did you find out?’

‘Everyone makes his own discoveries sooner or later,’ said
Jock Mackay in an enigmatic manner. ‘But it’s a charming
country on the whole,’ he continued expansively. ‘By the end
of the Raj they were so busy slitting each other’s throats that
they left ours unslit. Lucky.’ He sipped his drink.

‘Well, there doesn’t seem to be any resentment - quite the
opposite, if anything,’ said Basil Cox after a while, looking
over into the flowerbed. ‘But I wonder what people like the
Chatterjis really think of us…. After all, we’re still quite a
presence in Calcutta. We still run things here commercially
speaking, of course.’

‘Oh, I shouldn’t worry if I were you. What people think or
don’t think is never very interesting,’ said Jock Mackay.
‘Horses, now, I often wonder what they’re thinking ‘

‘Well, I had dinner with their son-in-law the other day -

549yesterday, as a matter of fact - Arun Mehra, he works with
us - oh, of course, you know Arun - and suddenly his brother
tumbles in, drunk as a lord and singing away and reeking of
some fearsome Shimsham fire-water - well, I’d never in a
hundred years have guessed that Arun had a brother like that.
And dressed in crumpled pyjamas !’

‘No, it is puzzling,’ agreed Jock Mackay. ‘I knew an old ICS
chap, Indian, but pukka enough, who, when he retired,
renounced everything, became a sadhu and was never heard of
again. And he was a married man with a couple of grown-up
children.’

‘Really ?’

‘Really. But a charming people, I’d say: face-flattering, backbiting, name-dropping, all-knowing, self-praising, lawmongering, power-worshipping, road-hogging, spittlehawking.
… There were a few more items to my litany once, but I’ve
forgotten them.’

‘You sound as if you hate the place,’ said Basil Cox.

‘Quite the contrary,’ said Jock Mackay. ‘I wouldn’t be
surprised if I decided to retire here. But should we go back in ?
I see you’ve lost your drink.’

7.13

‘DON’T think of anything serious before you are thirty,’
young Tapan was being advised by the round Mr Kohli, who
had managed to free himself of his wife for a few minutes. He
had his glass in his hand, and looked like a large, worried,
almost disconsolate teddy-bear in a slow hurry ; his huge
dome - a phrenological marvel - glistened as he leaned over
the bar ; he half closed his heavily lidded eyes and half opened
his small mouth after he had delivered himself of one of his
bon mots.

‘Now, Baby Sahib,’ said the old servant Bahadur firmly to
Tapan, ‘Memsahib says you must go to bed at once.’

Tapan began laughing.

‘Tell Ma I’ll go to bed when I’m thirty,’ he said, dismissing
Bahadur.

55°‘People are stuck at seventeen, you know,’ continued Mr
Kohli. ‘That’s where they imagine themselves ever afterwards
- always seventeen, and always happy. Not that they’re happy
when they’re actually seventeen. But you have some years to
go still. How old are you ?’

‘Thirteen - almost.’

‘Good - stay there, that’s my advice,’ suggested Mr

Kohli.

‘Are you serious?’ said Tapan, suddenly looking more than a
little unhappy. ‘You mean things don’t get any

better ?’

‘Oh, don’t take anything I say seriously,’ said Mr Kohli. He
paused for a sip. ‘On the other hand,’ he added, ‘take
everything I say more seriously than what other adults

say.’

‘Go to bed at once, Tapan,’ said Mrs Chatterji, coming up to
them. ‘What’s this you’ve been saying to Bahadur? You won’t

be allowed to stay up late if you behave like this. Now pour
Mr Kohli a drink, and then go to bed at once.’ *

7.14

‘OH, no, no, no, Dipankar,’ said the Grande Dame of Culture,
slowly shaking her ancient and benevolent head from side to
side in pitying condescension as she held him with her dully
glittering eye, ‘that’s not it at all, not Duality, I could never
have said Duality, Dipankar, oh dear me, no - the intrinsic
essence of our being here in India is a Oneness, yes, a Oneness
of Being, an ecumenical assimilation of all that pours into this
great subcontinent of ours.’ She gestured around the drawing
room tolerantly, maternally. ‘It is Unity that governs our souls,
here in our

ancient land.’

Dipankar nodded furiously, blinked rapidly, and gulped his
Scotch down, while Kakoli winked at him. That’s what she
liked about Dipankar, thought Kakoli : he was the only serious
younger Chatterji, and because he was such a

551gentle, accommodating soul, he made the ideal captive
listener for any purveyors of pabulum who happened to stray
into the irreverent household. And everyone in the family
could go to him when they wanted unflippant advice.

‘Dipankar,’ said Kakoli, ‘Hemangini wants to talk to you,
she’s pining away without you, and she has to leave in ten
minutes.’

‘Yes, Kuku, thanks,’ said Dipankar unhappily, and blinking a
little more than usual as a result. ‘Try to keep her here as long
as you can … we were just having this

interesting discussion Why don’t you join us, Kuku ?’

he added desperately. ‘It’s all about how Unity is the intrinsic
essence of our being ‘

‘Oh, no, no, no, no, Dipankar,’ said the Grande Dame,
correcting him a trifle sadly, but still patiently : ‘Not Unity, not
Unity, but Zero, Nullity itself, is the guiding principle of our
existence. I could never have used the term intrinsic essence for what is an essence if it is not intrinsic ? India is the land of
the Zero, for it was from the horizons of our soil that it rose
like a vast sun to spread its light on the world of knowledge.’
She surveyed a gulab-jamun for a few seconds. ‘It is the Zero,
Dipankar, represented by the Mandala, the circle, the circular
nature of Time itself, that is the guiding principle of our
civilization. All this’ - she waved her arm around the drawing
room once more, taking in, in one slow plump sweep the
piano, the bookcases, the flowers in their huge cut-glass vases,
the cigarettes smouldering at the edges of ashtrays, two plates
of gulab-jamuns, the glittering guests, and Dipankar himself ‘all this is Non-Being. It is the Non-ness of things, Dipankar,
that you must accept, for in Nothing lies the secret of
Everything.’

7.15

THE Chatterji Parliament (including Kakoli, who normally
found it difficult to wake up before ten) was assembled for
breakfast the next day.

552-

All signs of the party had been cleared away. Cuddles had
been unleashed upon the world. He had bounded around the
garden in delight, and had disturbed Dipankar’s meditations in
the small hut that he had made for himself in a corner of the
garden. He had also dug up a few plants in the vegetable
garden that Dipankar took so much interest in. Dipankar took
all this calmly. Cuddles had probably buried something there,
and after the trauma of last night merely wanted to reassure
himself that the world and the objects in it were as they used to
be.

Kakoli had left instructions that she was to be woken up at
seven. She had to make a phone call to Hans after he came
back from his morning ride. How he managed to wake up at
five - like Dipankar - and do all these vigorous things on a
horse she did not know. But she felt that he must have great
strength of will.

Kakoli was deeply attached to the telephone, and monopolized
it shamelessly - as she did the car. Often she would burble on
for forty-five minutes on end and her father sometimes found
it impossible to get through to his house from the High Court
or the Calcutta Club. There were fewer than ten thousand
telephones in the whole of Calcutta, so a second phone would
have been an unimaginable luxury. Ever since Kakoli had had
an extension installed in her room, however, the unimaginable
had begun to appear to him almost reasonable.

Since it had been a late night, the old servant Bahadur, who
usually performed the difficult task of waking the unwilling
Kuku and placating her with milk, had been told to sleep late.
Amit had therefore taken on the duty of waking his sister.

He knocked gently on her door. There was no response. He
opened the door. Light was streaming through the window
onto Kakoli’s bed. She was sleeping diagonally across the bed
with her arm thrown across her eyes. Her pretty, round face
was covered with dried Lacto-calamine, which, like papaya
pulp, she used to improve her complexion.

553Amit said, ‘Kuku, wake up. It’s seven o’clock.’

Kakoli continued to sleep soundly.

‘Wake up, Kuku.’

Kakoli stirred slightly, then said what sounded like ‘choomoo’. It was a sound of complaint.

After about five minutes of trying to get her to wake up, first
by gentle words and then by a gentle shake or two of the
shoulders, and being rewarded with nothing but ‘choo-moo’,
Amit threw a pillow rather ungently over her head.

Kakoli bestirred herself enough to say: ‘Take a lesson from
Bahadur. Wake people up nicely.’

Amit said, ‘I don’t have the practice. He has probably had to
stand around your bed ten thousand times murmuring, “Kuku
Baby, wake up; wake up, Baby Memsahib,” for twenty
minutes while you do your “choomoo”.’

‘Ungh,’ said Kakoli.

‘Open your eyes at least,’ said Amit. ‘Otherwise you’ll just
roll over and go back to sleep.’ After a pause he added, ‘Kuku
Baby.’

‘Ungh,’ said Kakoli irritably. She opened both her eyes a
fraction, however.

‘Do you want your teddy-bear ? Your telephone ? A glass of
milk ?’ said Amit.

‘Milk.’

‘How many glasses ?’

‘A glass of milk.’

‘All right.’

Amit went off to fetch her a glass of milk.

When he returned he found that she was sitting on the bed,
with the telephone receiver in one hand and Cuddles tucked
under the other arm. She was treating Cuddles to a stream of
Chatterji chatter.

‘Oh you beastie,’ she was saying; ‘oh you beastly beastie - oh
you ghastly, beastly beastie.’ She stroked his head with the
telephone receiver. ‘Oh you vastly ghastly mostly beastly
beastie.’ She paid no attention to Amit.

‘Do shut up, Kuku, and take your milk,’ said Amit

554irritably. ‘I have other things to do than wait on you, you
know.’

This remark struck Kakoli with novel force. She was wellpractised in the art of being helpless when there were helpful
people around.

‘Or do you want me to drink it for you as well ?’ added Amit
gratuitously.

‘Go bite Amit,’ Kakoli instructed Cuddles. Cuddles did not
comply.

‘Shall I set it down here, Madam ?’

‘Yes, do.’ Kakoli ignored the sarcasm.

‘Will that be all, Madam?’

‘Yes.’

‘Yes what ?’

‘Yes, thank you.’

‘I was going to ask for a good-morning kiss, but that Lactocalamine looks so disgusting I think I’ll defer it.’

Kakoli surveyed Amit severely. ‘You are a horrible, insensitive
person,’ she informed him. ‘I don’t know why women
swoooooon over your poetry.’

‘That’s because my poetry is so sensitive,’ said Amit.

‘I pity the girl who marries you. I reeeeeally pity her.’

‘And I pity the man who marries you. I reeeeeeally pity him.
By the way, was that my future brother-in-law you were going
to call ? The nutcracker ?’

‘The nutcracker ?’

Amit held out his right hand as if shaking it with an invisible
man. Slowly his mouth opened in shock and agony.

‘Do go away, Amit, you’ve spoilt my mood completely,’ said
Kakoli.

‘What there was to spoil,’ said Amit.

‘When I say anything about the women you’re interested in
you get very peeved.’

‘Like who ? Jane Austen ?’

‘May I make my phone call in peace and privacy ?’

‘Yes, yes, Kuku Baby,’ said Amit, succeeding in being both
sarcastic and placatory, ‘I’m just going, I’m just going. See
you at breakfast.’

5557.16

THE Chatterji family at breakfast presented a scene of cordial
conflict. It was an intelligent family where everyone thought
of everyone else as an idiot. Some people thought the
Chatterjis obnoxious because they appeared to enjoy each
others’ company even more than the company of others. But if
they had dropped by at the Chatterjis for breakfast and seen
them bickering, they would probably have disliked them less.

Mr Justice Chatterji sat at the head of the table. Though small
in size, short-sighted, and fairly absent-minded, he was a man
of some dignity. He inspired respect in court and a sort of
obedience even in his eccentric family. He didn’t like to talk
more than was necessary.

‘Anyone who likes mixed fruit jam is a lunatic,’ said Amit.

‘Are you calling me a lunatic ?’ asked Kakoli.

‘No, of course not, Kuku, I’m working from general
principles. Please pass me the butter.’

‘You can reach for it yourself,’ said Kuku.

‘Now, now, Kuku,’ murmured Mrs Chatterji.

‘I can’t,’ protested Amit. ‘My hand’s been crushed.’

Tapan laughed. Kakoli gave him a black look, then began to
look glum in preparation for a request.

‘I need the car today, Baba,’ said Kuku after a few seconds. ‘I
have to go out. I need it for the whole day.’

‘But Baba,’ said Tapan, ‘I’m spending the day with Pankaj.’

‘I really must go to Hamilton’s this morning to get the silver
inkstand back,’ said Mrs Chatterji.

Mr Justice Chatterji raised his eyebrows. ‘Amit?’ he asked.

‘No bid,’ said Amit.

Dipankar, who also declined transport, wondered aloud why
Kuku was looking so wistful. Kuku frowned.

Amit and Tapan promptly began an antiphonal chant.

‘We look before and after, and pine for what is -‘

‘NOT!’

556’Our sincerest laughter with some pain is -‘

TROT!’

‘Our sweetest songs are those that tell of saddest -‘

‘THOT !’ cried Tapan jubilantly, for he hero-worshipped
Amit.

‘Don’t worry, darling,’ said Mrs Chatterji comfortingly;
‘everything will come out all right in the end.’

‘You don’t have any idea what I was thinking of,’ countered
Kakoli.

• ‘You mean who,’ said Tapan.

‘You be quiet, you amoeba,’ said Kakoli.

‘He seemed a nice enough chap,’ ventured Dipankar.

‘Oh no, he’s just a glamdip,’ countered Amit.

‘Glamdip ? Glamdip ? Have I missed something ?’ asked their
father.

Mrs Chatterji looked equally mystified. ‘Yes, what is a
glamdip, darling ?’ she asked Amit.

‘A glamorous diplomat,’ replied Amit. ‘Very vacant, very
charming. The kind of person whom Meenakshi used to sigh
after. And talking of which, one of them is coming around to
visit me this morning. He wants to ask me about culture and
literature.’

‘Really, Amit ?’ asked Mrs Chatterji eagerly. ‘Who ?’

‘Some South American ambassador - from Peru or Chile or
somewhere,’ said Amit, ‘with an interest in the arts. I got a
phone call from Delhi a week or two ago, and we fixed it up.
Or was it Bolivia ? He wanted to meet an author on his visit to
Calcutta. I doubt he’s read anything by me.’

Mrs Chatterji looked flustered. ‘But then I must make sure that
everything is in order -‘ she said. ‘And you told Biswas Babu
you’d see him this morning.’

‘So I did, so I did,’ agreed Amit. ‘And so I will.’

‘He is not just a glamdip,’ said Kakoli suddenly. ‘You’ve
hardly met him.’

‘No, he is a good boy for our Kuku,’ said Tapan. ‘He is so
shinsheer.’

This was one of Biswas Babu’s adjectives of high praise. Kuku
felt that Tapan should have his ears boxed.

557’I like Hans,’ said Dipankar. ‘He was very polite to the
man who told him to drink the juice of bitter gourds. He does
have a good heart.’

‘O my darling, don’t be heartless. Hold my hand. Let us be
partless,’

murmured Amit.

‘But don’t hold it too hard,’ laughed Tapan.

‘Stop it!’ cried Kuku. ‘You are all being utterly horrible.’

‘He is good wedding bell material for our Kuku,’ continued
Tapan, tempting retribution.

‘Wedding bell ? Or bedding well ?’ asked Amit. Tapan grinned
delightedly.

‘Now, that’s enough, Amit,’ said Mr Justice Chatterji before
his wife could intervene. ‘No bloodshed at breakfast. Let’s talk
about something else.’

‘Yes,’ agreed Kuku. ‘Like the way Amit was mooning over
Lata last night.’

‘Over Lata ?’ said Amit, genuinely astonished.

‘Over Lata ?’ repeated Kuku, imitating him.

‘Really, Kuku, love has destroyed your brain,’ said Amit. ‘I
didn’t notice I was spending any time with her at all.’

‘No, I’m sure you didn’t.’

‘She’s just a nice girl, that’s all,’ said Amit. ‘If Meenakshi
hadn’t been so busy gossiping and Arun making contacts I
wouldn’t have assumed any responsibility for her at all.’

‘So we needn’t invite her over unnecessarily while she’s in
Calcutta,’ murmured Kuku.

Mrs Chatterji said nothing, but had begun to look anxious.

Til invite whoever I like over,’ said Amit. ‘You, Kuku, invited
fifty-odd people to the party last night.’

‘Fifty odd people,’ Tapan couldn’t resist saying.

Kuku turned on him severely.

‘Little boys shouldn’t interrupt adult conversations,’ she said.

Tapan, from the safety of the other side of the table, made a
face at her. Once Kuku had actually got so incensed

558she had chased him around the table, but usually she was
sluggish till noon.

‘Yes,’ Amit frowned. ‘Some of them were very odd, Kuku.
Who is that fellow Krishnan? Dark chap, south Indian, I
imagine. He was glaring at you and your Second Secretary
very resentfully.’

‘Oh, he’s just a friend,’ said Kuku, spreading her butter with
more than usual concentration. ‘I suppose he’s annoyed with
me.’

Amit could not resist delivering a Kakoli-couplet :

‘What is Krishnan in the end ? Just a mushroom, just a friend.’

Tapan continued :

‘Always eating dosa-iddly, Drinking beer and going piddly !’

‘Tapan!’ gasped his mother.

Amit, Meenakshi and Kuku, it appeared, had completely
corrupted her baby with their stupid rhyming.

Mr Justice Chatterji put down his toast. ‘That’s enough from
you, Tapan,’ he said.

‘But Baba, I was only joking,’ protested Tapan, thinking it
unfair that he should have been singled out. Just because I’m
the youngest, he thought. And it was a pretty good couplet too.

‘A joke’s a joke, but enough’s enough,’ said his father. ‘And
you too, Amit. You’d have a better claim to criticizing others
if you did something useful yourself.’

‘Yes, that’s right,’ added Kuku happily, seeing the tables
turning. ‘Do some serious work, Amit Da. Act like a useful
member of society before you criticize others.’

‘What’s wrong with writing poems and novels?’ asked Amit.
‘Or has passion made you illiterate as well ?’

‘It’s all right as an amusement, Amit,’ said Mr Justice
Chatterji. ‘But it’s not a living. And what’s wrong with the
law?’

559’“Well, it’s like going back to school,’ said Amit.

‘I don’t quite see how you come to that conclusion,’ said his
father dryly.

‘Well,’ said Amit, ‘you have to be properly dressed that’s like
school uniform. And instead of saying “Sir” you say “My
Lord” - which is just as bad - until you’re raised to the bench
and people say it to you instead. And you get holidays, and
you get good chits and bad chits just like Tapan does: I mean
judgments in your favour and against you.’

‘Well,’ said Mr Justice Chatterji, not entirely pleased by the
analogy, ‘it was good enough for your grandfather and for
me.’

‘But Amit has a special gift,’ broke in Mrs Chatterji. ‘Aren’t
you proud of him ?’

‘He can practise his special gifts in his spare time,’ said her
husband.

‘Is that what they said to Rabindranath Tagore?’ asked Amit.

‘I’m sure you’ll admit there’s a difference between you and
Tagore,’ said his father, looking at his eldest son in surprise.

‘I’ll admit there’s a difference, Baba,’ said Amit. ‘But what’s
the relevance of the difference to the point I’m making?’

But at the mention of Tagore, Mrs Chatterji had entered a
mode of righteous reverence.

‘Amit, Amit,’ she cried, ‘how can you think of Gurudeb like
that ?’

‘Mago, I didn’t say -‘ began Amit.

Mrs Chatterji broke in. ‘Amit, Robi Babu is like a saint. We in
Bengal owe everything to him. When I was in Shantiniketan, I
remember he once said to me -‘

But now Kakoli joined forces with Amit.

‘Please, Mago, really - we’ve heard enough about
Shantiniketan and how idyllic it is. I know that if I had to live
there I’d commit suicide every day.’

‘His voice is like a cry in the wilderness,’ continued her
mother, hardly hearing her.

560’I’d hardly say so, Ma,’ said Amit. ‘We idolize him more
than the English do Shakespeare.’

‘And with good reason,’ said Mrs Chatterji. ‘His songs come
to our lips - his poems come to our hearts -‘

‘Actually,’ said Kakoli, ‘Abol Tabol is the only good book in
the whole of Bengali literature.

The Griffonling from birth ‘V^ Is indisposed to mirth.

To laugh or grin he counts a sin And shudders, “Not on earth.”

Oh, yes, and I like The Sketches of Hutom the Owl. And when
I take up literature, I shall write my own: The Sketches of
Cuddles the Dog.’

‘Kuku, you are a really shameless girl,’ cried Mrs Chatterji,
incensed. ‘Please stop her from saying these things.’

‘It’s just an opinion, dear,’ said Mr Justice Chatterji, ‘I can’t
stop her from holding opinions.’

‘But about Gurudeb, whose songs she sings - about Robi Babu
-‘

Kakoli, who had been force-fed, almost from birth, with
Rabindrasangeet, now warbled out to the tune of a truncated
‘Shonkochero bihvalata nijere apoman’ :

‘Robi Babu, R. Tagore, O, he’s such a bore! Robi Babu, R.
Tagore, O, he’s such a bore !

O, he’s su-uch a bore.

Such a, such a bore.

Such a, such a bore,

O, he’s such a, O, he’s such a, O, he’s such a bore. Robi Babu,
R. Tagore, O, he’s such a bore!’

‘Stop ! Stop it at once ! Kakoli, do you hear me ?’ cried Mrs
Chatterji, appalled. ‘Stop it! How dare you! You stupid,
shameless, shallow girl.’

‘Really, Ma,’ continued Kakoli, ‘reading him is like trying to
swim breaststroke through treacle. You should

561hear lia Chattopadhyay on your Robi Babu. Flowers and
moonlight and nuptial beds….’

‘Ma,’ said Dipankar, ‘why do you let them get to you ? You
should take the best in the words and mould them to your own
spirit. That way, you can attain stillness.’

Mrs Chatterji was unsoothed. Stillness was very far from her.

‘May I get up ? I’ve finished my breakfast,’ said Tapan.

‘Of course, Tapan,’ said his father, Til see about the car.’

‘lia Chattopadhyay is a very ignorant girl, I’ve always thought
so,’ burst out Mrs Chatterji. ‘As for her books - I think that the

more people write, the less they think. And she was dressed in
a completely crushed sari last night.’

‘She’s hardly a girl any more, dear,’ said her husband. ‘She’s
quite an elderly woman - must be at least fifty-five.’

Mrs Chatterji glanced with annoyance at her husband. Fiftyfive was hardly elderly.

‘And one should heed her opinions,’ added Amit. ‘She’s quite
hard-headed. She was advising Dipankar yesterday that there
was no future in economics. She appeared to know.’

‘She always appears to know,’ said Mrs Chatterji. ‘Anyway,
she’s from your father’s side of the family,’ she added
irrelevantly. ‘And if she doesn’t appreciate Gurudeb sine must
\ave a heart oî stone.’

‘You can’t blame her,’ said Amit. ‘After a life so full of
tragedy anyone would become hard.’

‘What tragedy ?’ asked Mrs Chatterji.

‘Well, when she was four,’ said Amit, ‘her mother slapped her
- it was quite traumatic - and then things went on in that vein.
When she was twelve she came second in an exam. … It
hardens you.’

‘Where did you get such mad children ?’ Mrs Chatterji asked
her husband.

‘I don’t know,’ he replied.

‘If you had spent more time with them instead of going to the
club every day, they wouldn’t have turned out this way,’ said
Mrs Chatterji in a rare rebuke; but she was overwrought.

56zThe phone rang.

‘Ten to one it’s for Kuku,’ said Amit.

‘It’s not.’

‘I suppose you can tell from the kind of ring, hunh, Kuku?’

‘It’s for Kuku,’ cried Tapan from the door.

‘Oh. Who’s it from ?’ asked Kuku, and poked her tongue out
at Amit.

‘Krishnan.’

‘Tell him I can’t come to the phone. I’ll call back later,’ said
Kuku.

‘Shall I tell him you’re having a bath ? Or sleeping ? Or out in
the car ? Or all three ?’ Tapan grinned.

‘Please, Tapan,’ said Kuku, ‘be a sweet boy and make some
excuse. Yes, say I’ve gone out.’

Mrs Chatterji was shocked into exclaiming: ‘But, Kuku, that’s
a barefaced lie.’

‘I know, Ma,’ said Kuku, ‘but he’s so tedious, what can I do?’

‘Yes, what can one do when one has a hundred best friends ?’
muttered Amit, looking mournful.

‘Just because nobody loves you -‘ cried Kuku, stung to
fierceness.

‘Lots of people love me,’ said Amit, ‘don’t you, Dipankar ?’

‘Yes, Dada,’ said Dipankar, who thought it best to be simply
factual.

‘And all my fans love me,’ added Amit.

‘That’s because they don’t know you,’ said Kakoli.

‘I won’t contest that point,’ said Amit; ‘and, talking of unseen
fans, I’d better get ready for His Excellency. Excuse me.’

Amit got up to go, and so did Dipankar ; and Mr Justice
Chatterji settled the use of the car between the two main
claimants, while keeping Tapan’s interests in mind as well.

5^37.17

ABOUT fifteen minutes after the Ambassador was due to
arrive at the house for their one hour talk, Amit was informed
by telephone that he would be ‘a little late’. That would be
fine, said Amit.

About half an hour after he was due to arrive, Amit was told
that he might be a little later still. This annoyed him
somewhat, as he could have done some writing in the
meantime. ‘Has the Ambassador arrived in Calcutta ?’ he
asked the man on the phone. ‘Oh, yes,’ said the voice. ‘He
arrived yesterday afternoon. He is just running a little late. But
he left for your house ten minutes ago. He should be there in
the next five minutes.’

Since Biswas Babu was due to arrive soon and Amit did not
want to keep the family’s old clerk waiting, he was irritated.
But he swallowed his irritation, and muttered something
polite.

Fifteen minutes later, Senor Bernardo Lopez arrived at the
door in a great black car. He came with a lively young woman
whose first name was Anna-Maria. He was extremely
apologetic and full of cultural goodwill ; she on the other hand
was brisk and energetic and extracted a pocketbook from her
handbag the moment they sat down.

During the flow of his ponderous and gentle words, all slowly
weighed, deliberated and qualified before they could be
expressed, the Ambassador looked everywhere but at Amit: he
looked at his teacup, at his own flexed or drumming fingers, at
Anna-Maria (to whom he nodded reassuringly), and at a globe
in a corner of the room. From time to time he would smile. He
pronounced Very’ with a ‘b’.

Caressing his pointed bald head nervously and gravely, and
conscious of the fact that he was an inexcusable fortyfive
minutes late, he attempted to come straight to the point :

‘Well, Mr Chatterji, Mr Amit Chatterji, if I may make so bold,
I am often called upon in my official duties, as you know,
being Ambassador and so on, which I have been for about a
year now - unfortunately, with us it is not permanent, or indeed
definite ; there is an element of, I

564

!might even say, or it would perhaps not be unfair to say (yes,
that is better put, if I might be allowed to praise myself for a
locution in another language) that there is an element of
arbitrariness in it, in our stay in a particular place, I mean ;
unlike you writers who … but anyway, what I meant was that I
would like to put to you one question directly, which is to say,
forgive me, but as you know I have arrived here forty-five
minutes in tardiness and have taken up forty-five minutes of
your good time (of your good self, as I notice some say here),
partly because I set out very tardily (I came here directly from
a friend’s home here in this remarkable city, to which I hope
you will come some time when you are more at leisure - or to
Delhi needlessly - by which I mean rather, needless to say, to
our own home - though you must of course tell me if I am
imposing myself on you) but I asked my secretary to inform

you of that (I hope he did, yes ?), but partly because our driver
led us to Hazra Road, a, I understand, very natural mistake,
because the streets are almost parallel and close to each other,
where we met a gentleman who was kind enough to redirect us
to this beautiful house - I speak as an appreciator of not just
the architecture but the way you have preserved its
atmosphere, its perhaps ingenuity, no, ingenuousness, even
virginity - but as I said I am (to come to the point) late, and
indeed forty-five, well, what I must now ask you as I have
asked others in the course of my official duties, although this
is by no means an official duty but one entirely of pleasure
(though I indeed do have something to ask of you, or rather,
ask you about), I have to ask you as I ask other officials who
have schedules to keep, not that you are official, but, well, a
busy man: do you have any appointment after this hour that
you have allotted me, or can we perhaps exceed … yes ? Do I
make myself clear ?’

Amit, terrified that he might have to face more of this, said
hastily : ‘Alas, Your Excellency will forgive me, but I have a
pressing engagement in fifteen minutes, no, forgive me, five
minutes now, with an old colleague of my father’s.’

565’Tomorrow then ?’ asked Anna-Maria.

‘No, alas, I am going to Palashnagar tomorrow,’ said Amit,
naming the fictitious town in which his novel was set. He
reflected that this was no more than the truth.

‘A pity, a pity,’ said Bernardo Lopez. ‘But we still have five
minutes, so let me ask simply this, a long puzzlement to me:
What is all this about “being” and birds and boats and the river
of life - that we find in Indian poetry, the great Tagore
unexcluded? But let me say in qualification that by “we” I
mean merely we of the West, if the South may be subsumed in

the West, and by “find” I mean that which is as if to say that
Columbus found America which we know needed no finding,
for there were those there for whom “finding” would be more
insulting than superfluous, and of course by Indian poetry, I
mean such poetry as has been made accessible to us, which is
to say, such as has been traduced by translation. In that light,
can you enlighten me ? Us ?’

‘I will try,’ said Amit.

‘You see?’ said Bernardo Lopez with mild triumph to AnnaMaria, who had put down her notebook. ‘The unanswerables
are not unanswerable in the lands of the East. Felix qui potuit
rerum cognoscere causas, and when it is true of a whole
nation, it makes one marvel the more. Tï’ùV/ -wtitTi \ came
Vitit «nt -yeai ago \ Viad a sense -‘

But Bahadur now entered, and informed Amit that Biswas
Babu was waiting for him in his father’s study.

‘Forgive me, Your Excellency,’ said Amit, getting up, ‘it
appears as though my father’s colleague has arrived. But I
shall give earnest thought to what you have said. And I am
deeply honoured and grateful.’

‘And I, young man, though young here is merely to say that
the earth has gone around the sun less often since your
inception, er, conception, than mine (and is that to say
anything at all?), I too will bear in mind the result of this
confabulation, and consider it “in vacant or in pensive mood”,
as the Poet of the Lake has chosen to express it. Its intensity,
the urgings I have felt during this brief interview, which have
led me upwards from nescience to science - yet

566is that in truth an upward movement? Will time even tell
us that ? Does time tell us anything at all ? - such I will
cherish.’

‘Yes, we are indebted,’ said Anna-Maria, picking up her
notebook.

As the great black car spirited them away, no longer running
behind time, Amit stood on the porch step waving slowly.

Though the fluffy white cat Pillow, led on a leash by his
grandfather’s servant, crossed his field of vision, Amit did not
follow it with his eyes, as he normally did.

He had a headache, and was in no mood to talk to anyone. But
Biswas Babu had come specially to see him, probably to make
him see sense and take up the law again, and Amit felt that his
father’s old clerk, whom everyone treated with great affection
and respect, should not be required to sit and cool his heels
longer than necessary - or rather, shake his knees, which was a
habit with him.

7.18

WHAT made matters slightly uncomfortable was that though
Amit’s Bengali was fine and Biswas Babu’s spoken English
was not, he had insisted - ever since Amit had returned from
England ‘laden with laurels’ as he put it on speaking to him
almost exclusively in English. For the others, this privilege
was only occasional ; Amit had always been Biswas Babu’s
favourite, and he deserved a special effort.

Though it was summer, Biswas Babu was dressed in a coat
and dhoti. He had an umbrella with him and a black bag.
Bahadur had given him a cup of tea, which he was stirring
thoughtfully while looking around at the room in which he had
worked for so many years - both for Amit’s father and for his
grandfather. When Amit entered, he stood up.

After respectful greetings to Biswas Babu, Amit sat down at
his father’s large mahogany desk. Biswas Babu was

567sitting on the other side of it. After the usual questions
about how everyone was doing and whether either could
perform any service for the other, the conversation petered out.

Biswas Babu then helped himself to a small amount of snuff.
He placed a bit in each nostril and sniffed. There was clearly
something weighing on his mind but he was reluctant to bring
it up.

‘Now, Biswas Babu, I have an idea of what has brought you
here,’ said Amit.

‘You have?’ said Biswas Babu, startled, and looking rather
guilty.

‘But I have to tell you that I don’t think that even your
advocacy is going to work.’

‘No ?’ said Biswas Babu, leaning forward. His knees started
vibrating rapidly in and out.

‘You see, Biswas Babu, I know you feel I have let the family
down.’

‘Yes ?’ said Biswas Babu.

‘You see, my grandfather went in for it, and my father, but I
haven’t. And you probably think it is very peculiar. I know
you are disappointed in me.’

‘It is not peculiar, it is just late. But you are probably making
hail while the sun shines, and sowing oats. That is why I have
come.’

‘Sowing oats ?’ Amit was puzzled.

‘But Meenakshi has rolled the ball, now you must follow it.’

It suddenly struck Amit that Biswas Babu was talking not
about the law but about marriage. He began to laugh.

‘So it is about this, Biswas Babu, that you have come to talk to
me ?’ he said. ‘And you are speaking to me about the matter,
not to my father.’

‘I also spoke to your father. But that was one year ago, and
where is the progress ?’

Amit, despite his headache, was smiling.

Biswas Babu was not offended. He told Amit :

‘Man without life companion is either god or beast.

568Now you can decide where to place yourself. Unless you
are above such thoughts ‘

Amit confessed that he wasn’t.

Very few were, said Biswas Babu. Perhaps only people like
Dipankar, with his spiritual leanings, were able to renounce
such yearnings. That made it all the more imperative that Amit
should continue the family line.

‘Don’t believe it, Biswas Babu,’ said Amit. ‘It is all Scotch
and sannyaas with Dipankar.’

But Biswas Babu was not to be distracted from his purpose. ‘I
was thinking about you three days ago,’ he said. ‘You are so
old - twenty-nine or more - and are still issueless. How can
you give joy to your parents ? You owe to them. Even Mrs
Biswas agrees. They are so proud of your achievement.’

‘But Meenakshi has given them Aparna.’

Obviously a non-Chatterji like Aparna, and a girl at that, did
not count for much in Biswas Babu’s eyes. He shook his head
and pursed his lips in disagreement.

‘In my heart-deep opinion -‘ he began, and stopped, so that
Amit could encourage him to continue.

‘What do you advise me to do, Biswas Babu ?’ asked Amit
obligingly. ‘When my parents were keen that I should meet
that girl Shormishtha, you made your objections known to my
father, and he passed them on to me.’

‘Sorry to say, she had tinted reputation,’ said Biswas Babu,
frowning at the corner of the desk. This conversation was
proving more difficult than he had imagined it would. ‘I did
not want trouble for you. Enquiries were necessary.’

‘And so you made them.’

‘Yes, Amit Babu. Now maybe about law you know best. But I
know about early life and youth. It is hard to restrain, and then
there is danger.’

‘I am not sure I understand.’

After a pause Biswas Babu went on. He seemed a little
embarrassed, but the consciousness of his duty as an adviser to
the family kept him going.

‘Of course it is dangerous business but any lady who

569cohabits with more than one man increases risks. It is but
natural,’ he added.

Amit did not know what to say, as he had not got Biswas
Babu’s drift.

‘Indeed, any lady who has the opportunity to go to second man
will know no limits,’ Biswas Babu remarked gravely, even
sadly, as if admonishing Amit in a muted way.

‘In fact,’ he ruminated, ‘though not admitted in our Hindu
society, lady is more excited than man as a rule, I will have to
say. That is why there should not be too much difference. So
that lady can cool down with man.’

Amit looked startled.

‘I mean,’ continued Biswas Babu, ‘difference in age of course.
That way they are commenstruate. Otherwise of course an
older man is cool in later years when his wife is in the prime
of lusty life and there is scope for mischief.’

‘Mischief,’ echoed Amit. Biswas Babu had never talked in this
vein to him before.

‘Of course,’ thought Biswas Babu aloud, glancing in a
melancholy way at the rows of law-books around him, ‘that is
not true in all cases. But you must not leave it till you are more
than thirty. Do you have headache?’ he asked, concerned, for
Amit looked as if he was in pain.

‘A slight headache,’ said Amit. ‘Nothing serious.’

‘An arranged marriage with a sober girl, that is the solution.
And I will also think about a helpmeet for Dipankar.’

They were both quiet for a minute. Amit broke the silence.

‘Nowadays people say that you should choose your own lifepartner, Biswas Babu. Certainly, poets like myself say that.’

‘What people think, what people say, and what people do are
two different things,’ said Biswas Babu. ‘Now I and Mrs
Biswas are happily married for thirty-four years. Where is the
harm in an arrangement like that? Nobody asked me. One day
my father said it is fixed.’

‘But if I find someone myself -‘vïii-

V(

J»

*

*,*..

ïlI1’***•</HTML>

